Abstract eTOC blurb The gut microbiota is an emerging player in regulating host circadian rhythms. Sharma et al. summarize the chemical mechanisms through which the gut microbiota targets host epigenetic machinery to regulate diurnal rhythms. They describe current challenges and resources to further understand circadian regulation through the microbiota-epigenetic circuit. Introduction Circadian rhythms are 24-hour oscillations ubiquitous to normal organismal physiology. They are biochemical, biological, physiological and behavioral adaptations coupled to the rotation of the Earth to anticipate daily environmental changes and synchronize internal processes 1 . They have evolved to coordinate physiology and behavior with spatiotemporal environmental cues such as availability of food, light and temperature changes to enhance fitness and survival 2 . A variety of molecular and physiological processes are synchronized to the circadian rhythms such as gene expression, cell division, sleep, metabolism and immune responses 3 . Consequently, disrupted circadian rhythms have implications in numerous diseases including carcinoma, obesity, diabetes and neurodegenerative disorders 3 , 4 . Among an array of genetic and environmental factors that impact circadian rhythms, the gut microbiota, a community of bacteria, viruses and other microorganisms that colonize the intestine, has emerged as an important coordinator of host circadian rhythms and health ( Figure 1 ) 5 , 6 . The gut microbiotas in humans and mice are majorly composed of two phyla, Bacteroides and Firmicutes. These two phyla make up about 90% of the host’s gut microbiota 7 . Take the human gut for instance, these microbial inhabitants possess a genetic repertoire approximately 150 times larger than that of the human genome, with a marked enrichment for genes involved in metabolic processes 8 . The host and the gut microbiota share a mutualistic relationship; a favorable environment is provided to the microbiota by the host, and in turn, the gut microbiota aids in physiological processes such as digestion, metabolism, and protection against pathogens 9 , 10 . The gut microbiome composition differs among individuals and changes with external influences and perturbations 9 , 11 – 14 . Thus, gut microbiotas are diverse and can have a wide range of effects on the health of the host. Figure 1: The gut microbiota interacts with host tissues to modulate circadian physiology. Open in a new tab The gut microbiota produces microbial metabolites, attaches to host gut epithelium, and signals via structural components to generate systemic effects in the host. The gut microbiota can interact directly with intestinal epithelial cells, modulate enteric neurons and immune cells, or enter blood circulation and have effects on other tissues than the gut. In some cases, there is crosstalk between tissues (for example, immune cells act as an intermediate which relays microbial signals to intestinal epithelial cells). The effects of microbiota-host interactions have far-fetched effects in immune response, lipid metabolism and nutrient uptake rhythms. These rhythms are disrupted in disease conditions like carcinoma, obesity, diabetes, Crohn’s disease and neurodegenerative disorders. The microbiota itself exhibits diurnal rhythms in its composition and activities 15 , which generates oscillations of microbial molecules and metabolites that can influence host physiology 16 – 18 . A key mechanism by which the microbiota impacts host circadian physiology is through epigenetic regulation. In this review, we discuss the dynamics of the gut microbiota, highlight microbial factors that regulate host epigenetic states, circadian rhythms, interactions between them and indicate their significance in health and diseases. Circadian-epigenetic crosstalk regulates rhythmic gene expression Circadian rhythms are established by autoregulatory molecular feedback loops Circadian rhythms are established by interlocked transcription-translation feedback loops orchestrated by the circadian clock. The positive feedback is driven by main loop components, BMAL1 (also known as ARNTL) and CLOCK, which heterodimerize to activate genes that contain the E-box motif (5’- CACGT(T/G)-3’) at their promoters and enhancers 19 , 20 . These basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors bind to E-box motif sites and promote production of CRY and PER proteins. CRY and PER inhibit the transcriptional activity of BMAL1-CLOCK, thus attenuating their own production 19 , 21 . The main feedback loop is interlocked with two other feedback loops. One of these loops arises from BMAL1-CLOCK’S interaction with nuclear receptors of the ROR and REV-ERB families which ensure rhythmicity in Bmal1 ’s expression 20 . ROR (encoded by Rora, Rorb and Rorc) monomerically bind ROR response elements (ROREs) (5’-AGGTCA-3’) and effect constitutive transcriptional activation 22 , 23 . REV-ERBα/β (encoded by Nr1d1 and Nr1d2) , in contrast, repress transcription by binding to the same ROREs as monomers or homodimers 19 , 22 , thus repressing the transcription of Bmal1 itself. The CLOCK-BMAL1 complex activates REV-ERBα/β by binding to the E-boxes 24 . The other feedback loop arises from Bmal1 -CLOCK’s activation of DBP and ROR’s activation of NFIL3. NFIL3 and DBP bind to D-box elements (5’- TTATG(C/T)AA-3’) to regulate the expression of ROR, REV-ERB and PER genes 19 , 24 . REV-ERBα/β in turn repress Nfil3 . NFIL3 attenuates expression of genes containing the D-box, which would otherwise be activated by DBP 25 . This molecular clock machinery generates circadian rhythms and is ubiquitous to all cells. The circadian clock integrates environmental cues to synchronize physiological processes The mammalian circadian system consists of the central circadian clock and peripheral clocks. The central clock exists in the suprachiasmatic nuclei (SCN) of the hypothalamus 26 , which senses light inputs from the photoreceptors and retinal ganglion cells. Light-dependent electrical activity in the SCN synchronizes and amplifies the intrinsic molecular feedback loops generated in individual SCN neurons 27 . The SCN then communicates to peripheral tissues and synchronize circadian rhythms in physiology and behavior via peptides, hormones and autonomic nervous systems 20 , 28 , 29 . Thus, there exists peripheral-central clock crosstalk. Light (and temperature, to some extent) entrains the circadian system in the SCN, but molecular clocks in peripheral tissues can also be entrained by food, independent of the SCN’s synchronization efforts 29 . Timed feeding, for example, can restore genetic disruptions in circadian clock machinery and rescue transcriptome oscillations 30 . The peripheral clocks communicate with each other to process, integrate, and translate a multitude of environmental cues to alter the core circadian clocks. Although the inputs to the SCN and peripheral tissues are diverse and need to be synchronized, circadian rhythms in peripheral tissues can be decoupled from the central clock. The circadian clock controls daily oscillations in gene expression. This is implemented by clock proteins directly binding to target genes in a diurnal manner and recruiting cofactors to alter chromatin dynamics. Interactions of the core circadian clock proteins with chromatin and chromatin remodeling complexes can drive rhythmic transcription. BMAL1-CLOCK are pioneer transcription factors that open up heterochromatic DNA by orchestrating histone repositioning and removal, thereby promoting rhythmic transcription factor binding 31 . Moreover, the role of post-transcriptional and post-translational modifications is paramount in circadian oscillations and introduces a transcriptional delay. Apart from post-translational modifications by kinases, proteases, and phosphatases, processes like acetylation, glycosylation, methylation and sumoylation are also key to the dynamics of circadian oscillations of the core feedback loop and downstream targets 32 – 35 . Thus, oscillations in the transcriptome are driven by a highly regulated circadian clock that employs a multitude of mechanisms to generate this rhythmicity. The circadian clock employs epigenetic machinery to orchestrate rhythmicity of gene expression Epigenetic modification is a key mechanism underlying circadian regulation of gene expression. A particularly dynamic epigenome closely controls transcriptional oscillations within the chromatin fiber 36 . The functionality of numerous epigenomic features, including post-translational histone modifications, DNA methylation, non-coding RNAs and 3D chromatin architecture remodeling, is crucial for synchronizing the circadian rhythms of gene expression, which are extensively reviewed elsewhere 37 – 39 . Here we focus on histone modifications, which are widely involved in circadian regulation. Histone post-translational modifications control gene expression by altering chromatin dynamics and recruitment of protein complexes. They occur most commonly on lysine, arginine, serine and histidine residues on histone subunit tails. Different histone modifications have been reported over the years such as acetylation, methylation, and phosphorylation 40 . Histone methylation for example can occur as the trimethylation of histone H3 on lysine 4 (H3K4me3). Many of these modifications exhibit daily oscillations at clock genes or across the genome and can regulate rhythmicity of target gene expression 19 . A study by Crosio et al . 2000 41 was the first to show that chromatin remodeling affects circadian gene expression through fast phosphorylation of histone H3 on serine 10 (H3-S10) in the SCN as a result of exposure to light. Moreover, histone modifications associated with active transcription (e.g., H3K9ac, H3K27ac, H3K4me3) are synchronized and peak at different phases of a day/night cycle in the mouse liver 19 , 42 . Thus, epigenetic modifications undergo diurnal oscillations. Rhythmic histone modifications are programmed by the molecular clock and chromatin modifiers working in concert 36 . CLOCK has intrinsic histone acetyltransferase (HAT) activity and interact with other HATs (e.g., CBP, P300 and PCAF) to increase H3K9ac and H3K14ac to activate downstream genes 43 , 44 . Acetylation is removed by histone deacetylases (HDACs), which act in concert with HATs to drive the rhythms of histone acetylation. For example, SIRT1, an NAD-dependent HDAC, is diurnally recruited to circadian promoters to regulate the acetylation of H3 and BMAL1 45 . Histone deacetylase 3 (HDAC3), another HDAC, regulates histone acetylation at rhythmic genes, notably those involved in lipid metabolism 46 . HDAC3 forms a complex with the nuclear receptor corepressor 1 (NCoR1) and is recruited by REV-ERBα to the genome to drive rhythmic histone acetylation and gene expression 46 . Another HDAC, HDAC1 forms a complex with SIN3A and represses the transcription of Per1 47 . Thus, histone acetylation and its modifiers are implicated in circadian rhythms. Histone methylation is another epigenetic modification implicated in circadian rhythms. It is brought about by histone methyltransferases that add methyl groups, and histone demethylases, that remove methyl groups. MLL1, a methyltransferase that acts on histone H3 at lysine 4 (H3K4), complexes with CLOCK and is recruited to clock-controlled promoters in a circadian manner 48 . H3K4 methylation (e.g.,H3K4me1, H3K4me3) at these promoters is also rhythmic and is associated with transcriptional activation 49 . JARID1a, a histone demethylase, is enriched at the Per2 enhancers and regulates its expression 50 . Thus, histone methylation is another epigenetic mark implicated in rhythms generated by circadian clock machinery. Histone modifications are key mechanisms employed by the circadian clock to program oscillations in gene expression. Moreover, these epigenetic modifiers require specific substrates, and their enzymatic activities are regulated by Small molecules. These molecules are active modulators of gene and protein activity and do so by covalent modifications (glycosylation, acetylation, hydroxylation, succinylation and phosphorylation) and non-covalent modifications (signal transduction, transcriptional and translational regulation and complex assembly) of macromolecules 51 . A surplus of Small molecules is continuously produced by the resident gut microbiota, suggesting a mechanism by which the microbiota could regulate host circadian rhythms. We discuss this in the following sections. The gut microbiota impacts host circadian rhythms The gut microbiota exhibits diurnal oscillations The gut microbiota is increasingly recognized to influence host metabolism, immunology, development, host behavior, and overall physiology 12 , 13 , 52 . The microbiota assists in metabolic processes such as fermenting indigestible carbohydrates to produce short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs), transforming conjugated bile acids, synthesizing specific vitamins, breaking down dietary oxalates, and hydrolyzing urea through the action of urease 10 . Intrinsic features of the gut microbiota include compositional heterogeneity and temporal dynamics 53 , 54 . These microbial populations can fluctuate in response to external factors and disturbances. Microbial dynamics in the gut is linked to the day/night cycle as there are daily oscillations in bacterial abundance and composition. It is notable that gut epithelium-associated bacteria and absolute gut bacterial load is increased during feeding 5 , 55 , 56 . Moreover, the relative abundance of different bacterial species is also cycling across the day/night cycle. One study found that more than 15% of the identified Operational Taxonomic Units (OTUs) exhibited daily fluctuations in their relative abundance, including species like Lactobacillus reuteri, Dehalobacterium spp., and others from the Clostridiales, Lactobacillales, and Bacteroidales orders 5 . Subsequent research also found that OTUs oscillating in the relative abundance of genera, were from Bacteroidetes, Firmicutes, and Proteobacteria 55 , 57 . These studies also found a diurnal fluctuation in the functional bacterial KEGG pathways across a day/night cycle. Genes related to energy metabolism, DNA repair, and cell growth reach their peak abundance during the active (dark) phase for mice, while genes associated with detoxification, motility, and environmental sensing peak during the resting (light) phase 58 . Metabolism of host nutrients is also facilitated by the activation of bacterial metabolic pathways in the active phase 5 , 56 . This suggests that there could be temporal fluctuations in microbial metabolites that are linked to the day/night cycle. For instance, the levels of SCFAs are rhythmic, as a function of feeding and bacteria-dependent digestion of dietary fiber 56 , 59 . Other molecules such as secondary bile acids, serotonin, ergothioneine, lysine, xylose, glucose, and isovalerate also show diurnal rhythms in the gut lumen and serum of mice. These diurnal oscillations of the gut microbiota ultimately impact host physiology. The day/night oscillations of microbes are influenced by various factors such as the availability and timing of food intake 5 , 57 specific dietary elements like a high-fat diet 57 , 59 , 60 , androgens and gender differences 55 , 61 , the light-dark cycle 5 , and the host’s circadian clocks 58 , 62 , 63 . Altered gut microbiota abundance and composition, generally referred to as dysbiosis, have been observed for a number of human diseases 64 . Mice lacking core circadian clock genes such as Bmal1, Clock, Per1 and Per2 show disrupted oscillations in gut bacteria 5 , 55 , 65 , 66 . High-fat diet also dampens the rhythms in the gut microbiome and microbial metabolites 57 , 59 , 60 . However, time-restricted feeding (TRF) re-establishes the disrupted microbial rhythms, completely or partially. Biological sex is another important factor with female mice exhibiting more pronounced microbiome oscillations than their male counterparts 55 , 67 . This could be influenced by the difference in growth or sex hormones 68 . Thus, gut microbiota oscillations are modulated by diet and host genetics. The gut microbiota interacts with the core circadian clock Increasing evidence suggests that the gut microbiota can influence host circadian rhythms in gene expression and physiology. Mukherji et al . 2013 69 showed that in antibiotics-treated mice, the expression of Rora was reduced while that of Nr1d1 was increased in the intestine. Consequently, other clock transcripts including Bmal1, Cry1 and Per1/2 were also affected by antibiotics treatment. Similarly, Wang et al 2017 70 showed that the expression of Nr1d1 was increased while the expression of Nfil3 was reduced in germ-free mouse intestines. Importantly, although the expression level of clock transcripts is affected by depleting the microbiota, the overall rhythmicity is not affected. Several microbial metabolites are suggested to affect circadian clock gene expression. Acetate and butyrate, produced by gut bacterial fermentation, influence the expression of circadian genes in organs such as the heart, kidney, and liver 59 , 71 . Similarly, the intestinal microbiota transforms dietary choline into trimethylamine, which is then metabolized into trimethylamine N-oxide (TMAO). This compound can modify the expression of circadian clock genes, such as Bmal1 and Clock , in endothelial cells 72 . Inhibiting gut microbial enzyme choline trimethylamine lyase, leads to a reorganization of the host’s circadian clocks 73 . Moreover, deoxycholic acid and chenodeoxycholic acid, derived from the gut microbiota, increase the expression of Per2/3 while reducing that of Bmal1 in the ileum and liver 74 . Thus, metabolites derived from the gut microbiota can modulate core clock component gene expression. Invading pathogens can also disrupt the expression of circadian clock genes thereby disrupting host biological rhythms 75 . Infection with Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium, for example, resulted in the progressive decrease in the expression of Per2 in the caecum of mice 76 . Recent studies have investigated the effects of extraintestinal infections on circadian rhythms 4 , 77 – 79 . Inflammation triggered by infection has been shown to alter circadian clock gene expression and decrease the amplitude of circadian rhythms 80 . However, the role of intestinal pathogens in modifying clock gene expression and the underlying mechanisms requires further in-depth investigation. The microbiota impacts rhythmicity of clock-controlled genes and physiology Many clock-controlled genes showed altered rhythmicity when the gut microbiota was absent. For example, the total count of genes with rhythmic expression and the overall diurnal amplitude decreased in the intestine of germ-free or antibiotics-treated mice 56 , 68 , 81 . Conversely, more rhythmic genes were found in the liver and adipose tissue when the gut microbiota was absent 56 , 68 , 81 . These microbiota-dependent rhythmic genes were related to nutrient transportation and metabolism, immune response and cell cycle in different tissues 56 , 81 . Phase analysis of the rhythmic genes suggests a working-recharging alternation model in the intestine: nutrient absorption genes are activated in the night when mice are active and eating; protein translation and cell cycle genes are upregulated during the day, likely to replenish the intestinal epithelial population and maintain its functionality 82 . Similar working-recharging alternations are present in other peripheral organs such as liver and adipose tissues 5 , 16 , 56 . During the host’s active/feeding phase, processes like lipogenesis, bile acid production, and glycogenesis are upregulated. Conversely, catabolic activities such as lipid beta-oxidation in the adipose tissue, gluconeogenesis, glycogenolysis, and detoxification in the liver are upregulated when the host is in the resting/recharging phase, replenishing the levels of fatty acids and glucose in the circulation 5 , 16 , 56 . The role of the microbiota in programming the working-recharging alternations of physiological functions in these tissues needs to be further investigated. Microbiota dependent transcriptome oscillations modulate physiological processes such as metabolism and immunity in mice ( Figure 1 ). For example, the daily rhythms of many metabolites in serum or liver, including amino acids and polyamines was found to be dampened in antibiotic-treated and germ-free mice 56 , 68 . Rhythmicity of lipid absorption was also affected by the gut microbiome. The expression of CD36, a fatty acid transporter, was found to be rhythmic in conventional mouse gut, but the rhythms were dampened in germ-free mice 70 , 81 which led to reduced rhythms of serum lipids. Mucosal immunity also exhibits diurnal variations which are programmed by the gut microbiota. For instance, the rhythmic attachment of segmented filamentous bacteria induces rhythmic expression of antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) such as RegIIIγ in the intestine, which provide protection against diurnal fluctuations of foodborne pathogens 17 , 83 , 84 . The rhythm of RegIIIγ is also affected by feeding-induced enteric neuronal signaling where the vasoactive intestinal peptide promotes RegIIIγ expression 85 . These studies together suggest that microbiota-modulated gene expression profiles have profound implications in metabolism and immune responses. The gut microbiota also influences the rhythms in physical activity and exercise. Dohnalova et al. 86 reported that mice lacking a microbiome experienced a notable decrease in their capacity for both voluntary and endurance-based exercise. This diminished exercise capability was associated with species from the Lachnospiraceae family and microbiota-derived fatty acid amides, which enhanced the activity of sensory neurons through the endocannabinoid receptor CB1. This amplification of neuronal activity increased dopamine signaling in the striatum during physical exercise. Leone et al . 2022 87 showed that food anticipatory activity was increased in germ-free mice while another study reported no statistical changes of food anticipatory and wheel running activity in antibiotic-treated mice 88 . This discrepancy may be caused by incomplete depletion of gut bacteria upon antibiotics treatment. These findings highlight a complex interaction between microbiota and host physical activity, which may depend on specific bacteria and metabolites. The endocrine system is also a node of interaction between circadian rhythms and the gut microbiota 89 . Gut derived metabolites such as SCFAs, amino acid-derivatives and secondary bile acids modulate secretion of gut hormones which in turn regulate appetite, feeding behavior, glucose, and body metabolism across the day/night cycle 90 , 91 . Ghrelin, which controls appetite and timing of food intake, is known to be rhythmic in wild-type mice and arrhythmic in germ-free mice 68 . The gut microbiota can also modulate secretion of hormones in the central nervous system and modulate host function and cognition via the gut-brain axis 92 , 93 . Thus, the gut microbiota can regulate a myriad of rhythmic host physiological processes. Multiple studies have demonstrated an important role of the interleukin (IL)-23-group 3 innate lymphoid cell (ILC3)-IL-22 pathway in transducing microbial signals to the host circadian system 15 . Dendritic cells sense bacterial signals (e.g., lipopolysaccharide, flagellin) via the Toll like receptor (TLR)-Myd88 pathway and secrete IL-23. IL-23 is detected by ILC3 which causes the release of IL-22. IL-22 activates STAT3, a transcription factor in intestinal epithelial cells (IECs). STAT3 increases the expression of RegIIIγ and other AMPs 17 . Mice lacking RegIIIγ have dampened rhythms in the mucosal microbiome 56 , suggesting a bidirectional communication. STAT3 also promotes the expression of Nfil3 via a clock component, REV-ERBα. NFIL3 activates the expression of Cd36 which promotes lipid absorption 70 . The number of ILC3 is rhythmic, which is controlled by the core circadian clock 94 . Other immune cells also exhibit diurnal rhythms such as feeding induced eosinophil expansion and ILC2 activity 95 . Therefore, rhythmicity in the host immune system has an important role in the microbial-circadian rhythm crosstalk. The gut microbiota interacts with host epigenetic pathways Several studies reported diurnal rhythms in chromatin modifications which are dampened or reprogrammed in microbiota-depleted mice 56 , 81 . The rhythmicity of chromatin states is correlated with the rhythms of transcriptome ( Figure 2 ). The oscillation of chromatin modification is driven by two types of enzymes, writers and erasers, which add or remove these epigenetic modifications. The gut microbiota produces a variety of metabolites that could potentially act as substrates in chromatin remodeling reactions or modulate the activities of these enzymes ( Figure 2 ). Several metabolites, microbial structural components, the microbiota or specific microbiota members are known to modulate epigenetic modifiers or marks ( Table 1 ). Together, these suggest an important role of epigenetics in microbiome regulation of circadian rhythms. Figure 2: Molecular mechanism of microbiota-host circadian crosstalk: Open in a new tab The microbiota-host crosstalk can impact the daily rhythms in host metabolite levels, gene expression, chromatin state, sleep/wake cycle, and feeding behavior. The microbiota produces molecules such as bile acids, polyphenols, short-chain fatty acids, and vitamins that can impact central and peripheral clock genes to regulate host circadian rhythm. The microbiota can also interact with the gut-brain axis by influencing the secretion of hormones and neurotransmitters which play a role in circadian rhythmicity such as the sleep/wake cycle and feeding behavior. Histone modifications can be rhythmically regulated by the gut microbiota to influence chromatin states and gene expression. TF, transcription factor Table 1: Interactions of the gut microbiota with histone modifications. ↑, increase; ↓, decrease; + in histone modifications/ histone modifying enzymes column indicates co-existing marks; IECs, intestine epithelial cells, bolded text indicate studies that display the role of host-epigenetic crosstalk in diurnal rhythms. Microbiota/ associated molecule Cell/ tissue type Histone modification/ histone modifying enzyme Physiological effect Reference Microbiota Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron IECs ↑ HDAC3 Hdac3 expression could be increased by monocolonization Kuang et al . 2019 81 Bariatricus massiliensis MRx1342, Megasphaera massiliensis MRx0029, Roseburia intestinalis MRx0071, HT29 cells (colon IEC) ↓ HDAC HDACI and HDACII inhibition Yuille et al . 2018 133 Lactobacillus reuteri 6475 THP-1 cells (monocytes) ↑ H3K9et, H3K36et produces ethionine to decrease Tnfa and cell proliferation Röth et al . 2019 104 Legionella pneumophila A549 (lung epithelial) cells; SAEC primary lung cells ↑ HDAC5 Legionellea induced IL8 release dependent on NFkB and p38 Schmeck et al . 2008 127 ↑ H4K8ac, H3K14ac ↑ H3S10P Listeria monocytogenes Human umbilical vein endothelial cells ↑ H4K8ac, H3K14ac epigenetic modifications were MAPK and MEK1 dependent and were high at Il8 but not Ifng Schmeck et al . 2005 128 ↑ H3S10P microbiota presence IECs ↓ HDAC3 regulation of inflammation Alenghat et al . 2013 117 ↑ H3K9ac ↓ HDAC3 diurnal rhythmicity of nutrient uptake and lipid metabolism Kuang et al . 2019 81 ↑ H3K9ac, H3K27ac ↑ HDAC3 microbiota and HDAC3 needed for upregulation of MHC-II Eshleman et al . 2023 136 ↓ H3K9ac H3K9ac at Cle2 is lower when microbiota is present and prevents pathogen adherence by decreasing Cle2 and activating HDAC3 Woo et al . 2019 118 ↑ H3K4me3 IBD, inflammation, microbe-sensing response, icosanoid and ion transport, bile secretion and digestion and absorption Kelly et al . 2018 183 intestine, liver ⇅ H3K4me3+H3K 27ac The genomic loci of overlap of these modifications changed when microbiota was removed. Diurnal rhythms of global gene expression in the intestine, liver, and serum metabolome was observed. Thaiss et al . 2016 56 ⇅ H3K4me2+H3K 27ac liver, proximal colon ↑ H3K9ac+H3K14ac; H3K18ac+H3K27ac gut microbiota-mediated tissue-specific epigenetic changes are modulated by host diet. The gut microbiota was needed for acetylation-related Acly and NAMPT , and methylation-related Sardh, Dmgdh, Amt , and Gldc Krautkramer et al . 2016 184 liver, proximal colon, white adipose tissue ↑ H4K5ac, H4K8ac, H4K12ac, H4K16ac ↓ H3K18me1, H3K27me2+H3 K36me1 ↑ H3K27me3+H3 K36me0 innate lymphoid cells ↓ H3K4me2 these marks were altered at enhancer regions of Tcf7, Cd93 and Gjb2 in Type I ILCs that express T-bet and make IFNG Gury-BenAri et al . 2016 185 microbiota absence with timed feeding intestine ↑ HDAC6 timed feeding rescued H4ac diurnal rhythms in the absence of the microbiota in Drosophila melanogaster Zhang et al . 2023 39 ⇅ H4ac microbiota presence and HFD colon lECs ⇅ H3K27ac, H3K4me1 obesity and colon cancer Qin et al . 2018 186 Segmented filamentous bacteria bone marrow cells ↑ Jmjd3 increased Jmjd3 increased neutrophils and protected from Entamoeba histolytica infection by altering GMCSF signaling Burgess et al . 2016 187 Microbiota-derived metabolites acetate, butyrate, isovalerate, propionate Dendritic cells ↓ HDAC metabolites block DC production from bone marrow stem cells in Slc5a8 and HDAC-dependent manner Singh et al . 2010 122 ↑ H4ac P815 cells (mast cells) ↓ HDAC metabolites inhibit cell proliferation and increase apoptosis by HDAC inhibition Zhang et al . 2016 123 ↑ H3K9ac IEC organoids ↓ HDAC3 circadian rhythms by generating phase and amplitude shifts by HDAC inhibition (independent of the core clock) Fawad et al . 2023 134 butyrate lECs ↓ HDAC1, HDAC2, HDAC3 S and G2/M phase of the scell cycle Fellows et al . 2018 121 ↑ H4K12ac ↑ H3K18cr, H4K8cr intestinal stem cells &amp; progenitor cells ↑ H3K27ac, H3K9ac suppressing cellular proliferation in Foxo3 -dependent manner Kaiko et al . 2016 116 macrophage ↓ HDAC3 macrophage differentiation Schulthess et al . 2019 119 ↑ H3K27ac ↓ H3K27me3 ↓ HDAC decreased proinflammatory mediators like NO, IL-6, and lL-12, without altering TNF-α or MCP-1 Chang et al . 2014 188 CD4+ T cells (lamina propria) ↑ H3K9ac decreased CD4 T cell proliferation and activation mediated by GPR43 Kibbie et al . 2021 189 CD4+ T cells, ILCs ↑ H3K9ac suppression of gut inflammation by having these epigenetic changes at Il22 gene Yang et al . 2020 120 ↓ H3K9me3 Th17 cells &amp; Jurkat cells (T cells) ↑ H4ac H4 acetylation regulated RORγT expression in Th17 cells in a T cell stage-dependent manner Salkowska et al . 2017 190 Th17 cells ↓ HDAC suppresses RORγt and IL-17 and increases Treg-associated FoxP3 McBride et al . 2022 191 Treg cells (colonic) ↑ H3Ac induced differentiation to Tregs and decreased T-cell-dependent colitis development Furusawa et al . 2013 192 butyrate, propionate neutrophils ↓ HDAC suppresses proinflammatory response (decreased levels of TNF-α, CTNC-2αβ and production of NO) Vinolo et al . 2011 193 butyrate, valerate HT29 cells (colon IEC) ↓ HDAC HDACl and HDACll inhibition Yuille et al . 2018 133 ethionine THP-1 cells (monocytes) ↑ H3K9et, H3K36et decreased Tnfa and cell proliferation Roth et al . 2019 104 folate embryonic stem cells ↑ H3K4me1 Folate increased H3K4me1 around double-stranded-breaks Xiu et al . 2017 109 embryonic stem cells, fetal neural tube ↑ DOTL-1 Folate deficiency decreases H3K79me2 and expression of Shh and Sufu Li et al . 2023 110 ↑ H3K79me2 liver ↑ LSD1 Folate deficiency increased H3K4me2 without modifying acetylation of H3K14, H3K18 and H3K23 Garcia et al . 2016 108 ↓ H3K4me2 inositol triphosphate IECs ↑ HDAC3 IP3 promotes HDAC3-dependent colonic growth and damage repair Wu et al . 2020 103 ↓ H3K9ac methionine liver, HCT116 (colon epithelial cells) ↑ H3K4me3 Methionine availability modulates H3K4me3 by modifying S-adenosylmethionine levels Dai et al . 2018 111 Microbiota-derived structural components flagellin A549 (lung epithelial) cells ↑ H4K8ac, H3K14ac flagellin-enhanced IL8 release and histone acetylation Schmeck et al . 2008 127 ↑ H3S10P LPS bone marrow cells ↑ H3S10P H3S10P levels at IL10 decreased on LPS treatment alone but LPS+ IgG increased IL10 production Lucas et al . 2005 130 macrophages ↑ H3K4me3 LPS treatment increased H3K4me3 at Il12b in an lL10-independent manner Kobayashi et al . 2013 129 monocytes ↓ H3K27ac LPS dose-dependent manner decrease in H3K27ac near promoter regions genome-wide Naler et al . 2022 194 Lipoteichoic acid and peptidoglycan (alone or combined) MAC-T (bovine mammary epithelial cells) ↑ H3K9ac, H3K14ac Genome-wide H3K9ac, H3K14ac, and HAT activity were downregulated on treatment of peptidoglycan and lipoteichoic acid alone or together. But HDAC activity was increased only when both microbial structural components were treated together Wu et al . 2020 132 Lipoteichoic acid + peptidoglycan ↑ HAT ↓ HDAC microbial vesicles HCT8 (colon cancer epithelial cells) ↓ H3K4me3 microbial vesicles from Escherichia coli and Vibrio cholerae both induced increased H3K4me3 at promoters of genes related to immune response Vdovikova et al . 2018 131 Open in a new tab Microbiota-derived metabolites modulate host epigenetic states Eukaryotic epigenetic modifications comprise DNA methylation, RNA interference, post-translational histone modifications and chromatin remodeling. It provides a dynamic and regulated mode of fine-tuning gene expression as complex epigenetic machinery can be targeted by Small molecules such as dietary and microbiota-derived metabolites 96 . The crosstalk between epigenetic pathways and the microbiota has been comprehensively reviewed elsewhere 96 . Here we focus on histone modification which has been extensively implicated in mediating microbiota-circadian interactions. Post-translational modifications of histone tails include methylation, phosphorylation, acetylation, sumoylation, ubiquitylation, crotonylation, citrullination, biotinylation, formylation, malonylation, oxidation, hydroxylation, butyrlyation, O-GlcNAcylation, ADP ribosylation and histone proline isomerization, with newer modifications being continuously discovered 40 , 97 . Notably, the gut microbiota is reported to impact many of these histone modifications via microbial metabolites. The gut microbiota is a metabolic factory that can generate a variety of bioactive metabolites. Well-known examples include SCFAs, bile acids, lipids, vitamins, gasses, tryptophan and indole derivatives, choline metabolites, neurotransmitters, polyphenols, polyamines and other organic metabolites 98 . These metabolites are released in the gut and can be used by adjacent IECs, or have systemic effects as they get absorbed into enterohepatic circulation and are transformed in the liver ( Figure 1 ) 99 – 101 . These metabolites can be sensed by IECs directly to modulate metabolic and immune functions, or be translocated into the host and interact with enteric immune cells and neurons or reach to other organs by systemic circulation 102 . Microbial metabolites are known to modulate histones ( Table 1 ). Histone acetyltransferases and methyltransferases can use microbiota-derived SCFAs, folate, methionine and B vitamins as the acetyl or methyl donors to modify specific residues on histones ( Figure 2 ) 96 . The most well-studied group is SCFAs and are described in the following section. Recently other microbial metabolites were identified to affect host epigenetic states. For example, bacterial phytase converts phytate into inositol triphosphate, which activates HDAC3, and lowers H3K9ac levels in mouse IECs 103 . Lactobacillus reuteri derived metabolite ethionine could lead to ethylation of histones, specifically, H3K9et and H3K36et 104 . One-carbon metabolism is a biochemical pathway that utilizes folate and methionine to generate methyl groups for host methylation reactions. The host cannot synthesize methionine and folate, and hence relies on the diet and microbiota to provide these substrates 105 – 107 . Histone methylation is sensitive to fluctuations in one-carbon metabolism 108 . For example, folate increased the levels of H3K4me1 in mouse embryonic stem cells 109 . Another study found that folate deficiency correlated with decreased expression of histone H3 methyltransferase DOT1-L and its target, H3K79me2, in mouse embryonic cells, spinal and cranial tissues 110 . Similarly, reduced folate levels decreased the activity of histone demethylase LSD1 and increased the levels of H3K4me2 in mouse liver without altering H3K14ac, H3K18ac and H3K23ac 108 . Methionine increased the levels of H3K4me3 in the liver 111 . The microbiota can also make methionine γ -lyase, an enzyme that degrades methionine. This enzyme decreased H3K9me2, H4K20me3, H3K27me3 without altering H3K9me1 in vitro in colon cells 112 . This enzyme also decreased H3K4me3 and H3K9me3 in vitro in colon and lung cells 113 . Although these metabolites can be produced by the microbiota, its direct involvement has not been explored. The gut microbiota is expected to have local effects on the intestine, but microbiota-derived metabolites can cross the intestinal tissue and enter circulation to elicit systemic effects on host epigenetic states. This aspect of microbiota-epigenetic crosstalk is not well studied and warrants further exploration. SCFAs influence host histone modifications SCFAs are produced by bacterial fermentation of dietary fiber and complex carbohydrates. They have diverse roles including inhibiting harmful bacteria, promoting beneficial microflora, providing energy source, maintaining gut pH and electrolyte balance, promoting intestinal gluconeogenesis and gut barrier function, and reducing inflammatory response 99 , 100 , 102 , 114 . They enter the host by passive diffusion and active transport using transporters of the solute carrier family 115 . Acetate is the most abundant SCFA followed by propionate and butyrate, whereas isovalerate and isobutyrate are scarce 99 , 115 . SCFAs regulate the expression and activity of histone deacetylases, alter G protein-coupled receptor signaling and suppress inflammation by promoting differentiation of T cells into effector and regulatory T cells and modulating interaction with macrophages 99 , 102 , 114 , 115 . Cross metabolite interactions are also reported. One example is that SCFA production was enhanced by microbiota-derived indoles and phenol-derivatives 99 . Overall, SCFAs employ diverse mechanistic approaches to modulate host physiology. Besides a role as donors for histone modifications, SCFAs are usually regarded as HDAC inhibitors and cause increased histone acetylation and transcription at target sites 115 . Butyrate, one such SCFA, is utilized as a normal source of energy by colonocytes through β-oxidation, but accumulates in undifferentiated colonocytes and induces chromatin and expression changes 115 . In colonic epithelial stem cells, butyrate (but not acetate and propionate) suppressed proliferation in Foxo3 -dependent manner and increased global H3K9ac and H3K27ac marks 116 . SCFAs act on many other cell types too, including adipocytes, macrophages, T and B cells, microglia, eosinophils, dendritic cells and all muscle cell types ( Table 1 ) (extensively reviewed by Stein and Reiber 2023 115 ). Among all HDAC enzymes, HDAC3, has been shown to be regulated by the microbiota in particular. HDAC3 regulates genome-wide H3K9ac acetylation in IECs and coordinates lipid metabolism and barrier functions in a microbiota-dependent manner 82 , 117 , 118 ( Figure 3 ). Butyrate inhibits HDAC3 and drives macrophage differentiation by decreasing H3K27me3 and increasing H3K27ac genome wide 119 . In another study, butyrate increased H3K9ac and decreased H3K9me3 at the Il22 gene in CD4 + T and innate lymphoid cells, thereby suppressing gut inflammation 120 . HDAC3 and another two HDACs, HDAC1 and HDAC2, also decrease crotonylation on histone H3, and their decrotonylation activity was found to be regulated by microbiota-derived butyrate 121 . Additionally, acetate, butyrate, propionate and isovalerate decreased HDAC levels in dendritic and mast cells 122 , 123 . Thus, SCFAs can inhibit HDACs in many cell types. Figure 3: The gut microbiota-epigenetic circuit regulates host circadian rhythms. Open in a new tab Microbial molecules modulate HDAC3 in intestinal epithelial cells to generate genome-wide rhythms of H3K9ac and H3K27ac, which results in diurnal rhythms in nutrient uptake and lipid metabolism. Diurnal attachment of some specific microbiota members is known to modulate MHC-II expression. Moreover, segmented filamentous bacteria signal via the TLR-MyD88 pathway in dendritic cells, which leads to a release of IL-23, that acts on type 3 innate lymphoid cells to drive the release of IL-22. IL-22 acts on STAT3 and promotes rhythmicity of antimicrobial peptide production. We hypothesize that HDAC3 might be involved in the diurnal rhythmicity of MHC-II expression and STAT3 activity. Some studies show that the microbiota modulates epigenetic marks like H3K27ac, H3K4me3, H3K4me2 and H4ac, but the molecular basis of these interactions is not known. Similarly, a study in Drosophila revealed that the gut microbiota generates rhythmicity of HDAC6 expression, but the basis of this is not known either. Solid arrows indicate an established mode of rhythmicity. Dashed arrows indicate potential mode of circadian rhythmicity. Furthermore, SCFAs can impact histone modification via additional mechanisms. Thomas et al . 2021 124 showed that butyrate and propionate, but not acetate are converted to corresponding acyl-CoAs, which activate the acetyltransferase p300 via an auto-acylation loop. It is suggested that the concentration of SCFAs is important to determine how SCFAs affect chromatin states. Yu et al . 2016 125 reported that SCFAs reduce the expression of SIRT1 and EZH2, a histone methyltransferase in a dose-dependent manner, which leads to increase of H4K12ac and reduction of H3K27me3 and H3K9me3. Furthermore, butyrate can decrease H3K27me3 in macrophages and increase H3K18cr and H4K8cr in IECs 120 , 121 . Thus, SCFAs can also modulate epigenetic marks apart from its well-studied roles as HDAC inhibitors. Therefore, microbial-derived SCFAs have diverse roles in regulating host histone modifications. It is necessary to dissect individual SCFAs and histone modifiers in physiological contexts to understand the exact mechanisms by which microbial SCFAs regulate histone modifications. Microbial structural components modulate host histone modifications Besides microbial metabolites, structural components from the gut microbiota such as flagellin and LPS can modulate host chromatin state, transcription and physiology via pattern recognition receptors and immune signaling pathways 126 . For example, Legionella pneumophila increases the level of H4K8ac, H3K14ac and H3S10P and promotes the release of IL-8 from lung epithelial cells by regulating the expression of HDAC5 in a flagellin-dependent manner 127 . Listeria monocytogenes infection and LPS itself, could increase H4K8ac, H3K14ac and H3S10P at Il8 but not Ifng in human umbilical vein endothelial cells 128 . Moreover, LPS could increase H3K4me3 and H4 acetylation levels at Il12b in macrophages, while HDAC1 and HDAC3 were required for IL-10-dependent inhibition of Il12b expression 129 . Another study in bone marrow cells found that H3S10P at Il10 decreased on LPS treatment alone, but both H3S10P and IL-10 production increased upon co-treatment of LPS with IgG-opsonized erythrocytes 130 . Thus, microbial components such as flagellin and LPS can modulate host epigenetics in different tissues. Along with flagellin and LPS, lipoteichoic acid, peptidoglycan and microbial vesicles are also implicated in alteration of histone modifications. Microbial vesicles from both Escherichia coli and Vibrio cholerae increase H3K4me3 at promoters of genes related to immune response in HCT8, an epithelial colon cancer cell line 131 . Another study found that the genome-wide H3K9ac, H3K14ac and overall HAT activity was downregulated in bovine mammary epithelial cells on treatment of peptidoglycan and lipoteichoic acid individually or when mixed together 132 . The overall HDAC activity in contrast, was increased only when both microbial structural components were treated together. Thus, microbial structural components can affect histone modifications in different cell types. However, it remains unclear whether these molecules directly regulate histone modifiers and change chromatin states or whether it is through indirect mechanisms such as the TLR-Myd88 pathway. Recent studies have begun to examine specific microbial species that can modulate histone epigenetic modifications or associated enzymes. Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron , but not Escherichia coli , Enterococcus faecalis , Salmonella typhimurium , could increase the expression of Hdac3 in IECs 81 . Other studies also suggest bacterial-specific mechanisms underlying epigenetic regulation. For example, Lactobacillus reuteri 6475 , a gut commensal, increased H3K9 and H3K36 ethylation which led to decreased Tnfa and cell proliferation in monocytes 104 . Bariatricus massiliensis MRx1342, Megasphaera massiliensis MRx0029, and Roseburia intestinalis MRx0071 could lead to inhibition of class I and class II HDACs 133 . Legionella pneumophila alone could increase HDAC5 expression, and affect H4K8ac, H3K14ac and H3S10P in lung epithelial cells, which led to the release of IL-8 127 . Meanwhile, another study found that Listeria monocytogenes also increased the same three epigenetic marks at Il8 , but not at Ifng in human umbilical vein endothelial cells 128 . Thus, we are beginning to understand how specific gut microbes can modulate epigenetic modifications. A microbiota-epigenetic circuit regulates host circadian rhythms As discussed above, epigenetics, in particular, histone modification, is a key mechanism in regulation of circadian rhythms. Histone modification is highly sensitive to the gut microbiota and microbial molecules, both of which have their own daily rhythms. These findings collectively suggest a paradigm that the gut microbiota and potentially rhythmic microbial molecules can impact host circadian rhythms via histone modification. Earlier studies showed that mice lacking the microbiota exhibit altered or loss of rhythms in histone modification. For instance, Thaiss et al . 2016 56 showed that the depletion of the gut microbiota by antibiotics dramatically reprogrammed genome-wide H3K27ac rhythms in the colon. Cycling H3K27ac signals at both promoter and enhancer regions in conventional mice lost rhythmicity upon antibiotic-treatment. The remodeling of histone acetylation rhythms is associated with rhythms in transcription. Another study in Drosophila showed that the microbiome was stable over a day/night cycle and dampened the rhythms of histone acetylation and gene expression in the gut. Instead, TRF enhanced the rhythms of several HDACs and H4 acetylation, and increased their sensitivity to stress 39 ( Figure 3 ). The authors proposed that this microbiome-dependent mechanism allows gut circadian rhythms to be aligned with the rhythms in the brain and the day/night cycle, and ultimately maintain the synchrony of circadian rhythms throughout the body. These findings together suggest that the gut microbiota can program host circadian rhythms through histone modification. Recent studies have begun to explore the molecular basis of epigenetic pathways underlying microbial-circadian interaction. One study showed that H3K9ac and H3K27ac exhibit synchronized genome-wide oscillation in the Small intestinal epithelium but the marks were consistently high and not cycling in germ-free mice 81 . The gut microbiota increased the expression and diurnal DNA binding activity of HDAC3, and mice lacking this enzyme also lost the rhythms of histone acetylation. HDAC3 drove the diurnal rhythmicity of nutrient uptake and lipid metabolism by modulating the expression of transporters, including CD36, a fatty acid transporter ( Figure 3 ). Moreover, the same study showed that HDAC3 was also required for jet lag induced weight gain. The diurnal rhythms of core clock genes Bmal1, Per2 and Nr1d1 were intact even when HDAC3 was knocked out, indicating HDAC3’s role in circadian histone acetylation without altering the core clock machinery. This suggests that HDAC3 is a key epigenetic factor in microbial regulation of host circadian rhythms. Studies are beginning to examine the mechanisms underlying microbial regulation of HDAC3 and its relation to circadian rhythms. Fawad et al . 2022 134 exploited an enteroid system with Per2- and Bmal1 -driven reporters and showed that SCFAs including acetate, butyrate, propionate and isovalerate can alter the rhythms of reporters by generating phase and amplitude shifts ( Figure 3 ). HDAC inhibition via pharmacologic inhibitors recapitulates the phase delay phenotype. Furthermore, the authors showed that butyrate-induced phase delay was lost in enteroids lacking HDAC3, suggesting that SCFAs regulate the rhythm via HDAC3. Since this study used an in vitro enteroid model and clock gene reporters, it would be interesting to examine how SCFAs affect HDAC3-dependent rhythms, including histone acetylation using in vivo models. Besides SCFAs, microbiota-derived inositol triphosphate was found to activate HDAC3, and consequently lower H3K9ac level in IECs 103 ( Figure 3 ). Whether inositol triphosphate or other microbial molecules can impact HDAC3-dependent rhythms remains to be examined. Besides metabolic pathways, the gut microbiota and HDAC3 regulates a variety of other rhythmic processes in IECs, such as immune responses. The interplay between gut microbiota and epigenetic pathways to modulate oscillations of immune molecules is becoming clear. Major histocompatibility complex class II (MHC-II) but not MHC-I has diurnal rhythms in the Small intestine which are modulated by diet composition and rhythmicity. Specific members of the gut microbiome induced these rhythms of MHC-II expression by diurnal attachment to the epithelium 135 ( Figure 3 ). MHC-II expression in the intestine was also known to be upregulated in a HDAC3 and microbiota dependent manner 136 . This hints at the crosstalk between diurnal rhythmicity, epigenetics and the gut microbiota in modulating host MHC-II expression. Similarly, AMPs like REGIIIγ show rhythmic expression in the intestine driven by diurnal attachment of segmented filamentous bacteria and phosphorylation of STAT3 17 . Another study showed that HDAC3 also promoted the phosphorylation of STAT3 137 , suggesting a role of HDAC3 in rhythmic antimicrobial responses. Collectively, these findings suggest that HDAC3 is a key molecule integrating microbial and circadian cues to program host metabolic and immune functions in anticipation of environmental changes. Challenges and future perspectives In the last decade, the gut microbiota has emerged as a new factor that regulates host circadian functions. The communication between the microbiota and circadian system has key roles in programming host gene expression, metabolism and immunity in accordance with the day/night oscillations. Recent studies have recognized that chromatin modification and HDACs can integrate diet, microbial and metabolite signals to direct host rhythms in gene expression and functions. However, the molecular mechanisms of microbial regulation of host circadian rhythms via epigenetic pathways and the implications in health and disease requires further investigation. Here, we discuss outstanding questions and challenges including the crosstalk between microbial and circadian signals, the complexity and specificity of epigenetic mechanisms and its implications in human health and disease. We further describe resources and tools that can be potentially used to address these questions and gain a better understanding of these biological processes. How are microbial and host circadian signals integrated? The mammalian circadian system has a hierarchical structure where the central clock in the SCNs receives the light signal and synchronizes peripheral clocks and rhythms. Although the expression of core circadian clock genes can be altered by the gut microbiota, the phase of their circadian rhythms still remains intact. Evidence suggests that the gut microbiome can promote the rhythmicity of clock-controlled genes such as metabolic and immune pathways 56 , 68 . One mechanism is through core clock-dependent diurnal recruitment of histone modifiers 81 . Do these findings suggest that the gut microbiome functions as an amplifier of intrinsic circadian signals? However, the gut microbiota has its own daily rhythms, and can generate oscillations of bioactive molecules such as SCFAs that impact host rhythmic gene expression, chromatin modification and physiology. How are the microbial rhythmic signal and light-induced central circadian signal communicated and synchronized in different tissues? Understanding the exact mechanisms will be important for determining the roles of the gut microbiota in modulating circadian biology. Additionally, studies have revealed that the gut microbiota may differentially affect the rhythmicity of different biological processes 5 , 56 , 68 , 81 , 82 . Weger et al. 2019 68 showed that more genes in the ileum and duodenum lost rhythmic oscillation than gained it when the microbiota was absent. However, in the liver and white adipose tissues, the opposite was true. What is the biological significance of establishing new rhythms in the host when the microbiota is absent? One study showed that pyruvate metabolism, glutathione metabolism and the tricarboxylic cycle were oscillating in the microbiome of mice 56 . Upon microbiota depletion, the mouse ileum gained oscillations in these processes. Another study in IECs showed that genes that gained oscillations in the absence of the microbiota were related to nucleic acid metabolism and protein modification and transport 82 . Thus, loss of rhythmic functionalities of the microbiota possibly leads to a compensatory establishment of new rhythms in the host. In contrast to the rhythmic mouse gut microbiota, the fly gut microbiota is not rhythmic, even under a timed-feeding regimen 39 . The authors speculate that the microbiota damped oscillations of the fly transcriptome to facilitate synchronization between different tissues in the body. Thus, the microbiome could stabilize or dampen host rhythms in different tissues and organisms. Implications of de novo establishment of rhythms in the absence of the microbiota are scarce and warrant further investigation. Moreover, whether microbiota-epigenetic circuits are involved in establishing new rhythms is yet to be investigated. How does epigenetic machinery orchestrate different circadian pathways? Recent studies have suggested that HDAC3 is a key epigenetic molecule linking the gut microbiota and host circadian rhythms. The gut microbiota activates HDAC3 and drives genome-wide oscillations of histone acetylation and gene expression. Particularly, the microbiota promote lipid uptake and the diurnal rhythm via HDAC3-dependent repression of fatty acid oxidation genes and activation of lipid transporter genes 81 . Microbial SCFAs can modulate gut epithelial rhythms via a HDAC3-dependent mechanism 134 . Despite the growing understanding of HDAC3 in microbial-circadian rhythm interactions, several central questions arise. First, several studies have suggested that HDAC3 coordinates the rhythms in epithelial metabolism, immunity (e.g., AMP production, MHC-II expression) and cell proliferation 82 . How does a single molecule interpret microbial signals and direct diverse downstream circadian pathways? Is the pleiotropic role of HDAC3 defined by (1) different cell types and cellular contexts, (2) interactions with different transcription factors and other effector proteins or (3) different microbial signals (e.g., different SCFAs, other microbial metabolites)? Further studies are needed to determine the role of HDAC3 in microbial regulation of circadian rhythms. Moreover, what alternative histone modifications and modifying enzymes are involved in microbiota-circadian rhythm interactions? For example, SIRT1 is another HDAC known to regulate circadian rhythms and epithelial metabolic and immune functions in a microbiota-dependent manner recently 45 , 138 , 139 . Does SIRT1 contribute to microbiota-dependent rhythms in histone acetylation and gene expression? Moreover, many other microbial metabolite-host epigenetic modification circuits have been discovered. Studies have shown the role of folate and methionine in histone methylation and certain SCFAs in histone crotonylation. Studies exploring the modulation of host circadian rhythms by the microbiota via other histone modifications and other alternative mechanisms apart from histone modifications are highly warranted. How does sex affect microbial regulation of circadian rhythms? Host sex-dimorphisms arise from a combination of hormonal and genetic factors. This leads to sex-differences in physiology, anatomy and behavior. Circadian rhythms exhibit sexual dimorphisms as a result of interactions between circadian and reproductive cycles, effects of sex hormones, and differences in SCN anatomy and cellular function 140 , 141 . Sexual dimorphisms in host epigenetics contribute to sex-biases in diseases and are primarily mediated by hormones, sex-specific epigenetic modifiers and their interactions 142 , 143 . Recent studies report sex differences in the composition and abundance of various members of the gut microbiota 67 , 144 , 145 . Interactions of the gut microbiota with hormones have been implicated in the sexual dimorphisms in metabolic disease 146 . Thus, sex differences could play a role in tripartite interactions among the gut microbiota, epigenetics and circadian rhythms. Recent studies have begun to investigate the role of the gut microbiota in sexually-dimorphic rhythms. The microbiota drives sex differences in host diurnal rhythms by directing sexual maturation and growth hormone secretion 68 . The authors showed that the absence of the microbiome diminished sexually dimorphic circadian rhythms in the liver transcriptome without starkly affecting circadian clock gene expression. Absence of the microbiome led to the male transcriptome being feminized, whereas the female transcriptome was masculinized. Additionally, they showed that circadian clock gene knockout male mice, Cry1/2 −/− and Bmal1 −/− , and chronically jetlagged male mice exhibited feminized liver transcriptomes. Some other studies have shown that the rhythms of the microbiota itself shows differences between biological sex 67 , 144 . The authors further showed that females have more rhythmic genes in their Small intestine transcriptome than males. Therefore, evidence for sexually-dimorphic interactions between the gut microbiota and circadian rhythms have emerged. However, studies exploring the interactions of gut microbiota, epigenetics, and circadian biology in the context of sex-differences remain limited. This is especially relevant because many epigenetic modifiers are located on sex chromosomes 147 . Therefore, studies including individuals with abnormal copies of sex chromosomes, pre-pubertal children, post-menopausal women, or the four-core genotypes mouse model 148 , 149 can help separate contributions of hormones and sex chromosomes. Since there exist sexual dimorphisms in host physiology, disease susceptibility, and therapeutic responses, it is crucial to consider that the current understanding of circadian modulation by microbiota-epigenetic circuits predominantly comes from studies in male mice and that the outcomes may differ significantly in females. The microbiota could target sex-specific epigenetic modifiers, modulate hormones, and alter interactions of sex-hormones with epigenetic machinery. Studies considering the role of biological sex in diurnal rhythm modulation by microbiota epigenetic circuits are highly warranted. How do we utilize individual findings to better understand diseases and develop therapeutics? The gut microbiome has been implicated in a variety of human diseases, such as obesity and type 2 diabetes, inflammatory bowel disease, liver disease, sleep disorder and colorectal cancer. The complex interplay between the gut microbiota and circadian rhythm could have significant implications for understanding and treating disease conditions. For example, the time-of-day difference could impact how the host responds to the fluctuations of nutrient and pathogen challenges and the efficiency of medicine. Circadian misalignment can exaggerate the process of pathogenesis or cause new disorders. Many natural molecules or pharmacological chemicals are known to modulate mammalian epigenetic states and have the potential to be used as therapeutics. Moreover, genetically editing epigenetic-modifying bacteria would also be an effective approach for treating diseases. Although the complexity of host-microbiota interactions makes it challenging to understand basic biological processes, studies on epigenetic regulation of microbiota-circadian rhythm interactions are particularly exciting, as they offer promising new avenues for treating human diseases. However, challenges exist when developing new therapies by targeting the gut microbiome in humans. These challenges are caused by a variety of factors including causation vs correlation, effects of exercise, sampling methods, limitations of databases, bacterial bias, age, geographical and sex differences, dietary composition and temporal variations in sampling and majorly, human-to-human genetic variability 150 . To make matters more difficult, there is great variability between mouse and human studies of circadian rhythms due to nocturnal and diurnal behaviors, respectively, but phase analyses, humanized mice and diurnal rodents like antelope ground squirrels and African grass rats have been proposed to bridge some gaps 151 – 154 . Differences between mouse gut microbiota studies have also emerged because of inherent differences in anatomy, microbiota composition, genetics and physiology where questions about differences in dysbiosis shifts in disease states, mouse housing conditions, coprophagy, mouse strain and facility specific microbiota differences, and differences in standard Chow diets itself can alter microbiome results 154 , 155 . Nonetheless, these can be boons because studies in mice offer much more control with environments, homogeneous genetics, and ability to study germ-free conditions. Thus, there is a need to utilize innovative tools and resources to fill shortcomings of these studies. How do microbiota-epigenetic circuits function upon circadian rhythm disruption? Circadian rhythm disruption such as shift work schedule and jet lag has become prevalent nowadays and is associated with a variety of diseases. When simulating shift work conditions in rodent models, metabolism-related transcripts displayed loss of rhythmicity while certain non-oscillating transcripts gained rhythms 156 . Recent studies have investigated the roles of the microbiota in circadian disruption and recovery. Fecal microbiota analysis from individuals experiencing jet lag and shift-workers revealed dysbiosis and disrupted oscillations of the microbiome 5 , 157 , 158 . Mice that received fecal transplants from the jet-lagged subjects developed obesity and glucose intolerance, suggesting a causal role of the microbiota in circadian disorders 5 . Changes of the gut microbiota in circadian disorders are often attributed to altered food composition and feeding schedule 57 , 59 . The rhythmic microbiota transduces dietary cues to modulate host metabolism 159 . However, high-fat diet changes the microbiome composition and dampens the diurnal oscillations, which can be partially restored with TRF 59 , 144 , 160 . TRF rescues circadian misalignment by restricting food to phases when subjects are usually active, thus, synchronizing metabolism with the environment 161 , 162 . The gut microbiota has been implicated in TRF-mediated rescue. TRF decreased the obesogenic bacterial profile and increased presumed obesity-protective bacteria 57 . Strikingly, feeding pattern changed the composition of the microbiota even when mice were fed on the same diet 57 , 144 . It has also been shown that TRF improves glucose tolerance and insulin secretory response 163 . However, the role of the gut microbiota was not investigated in this study. Other strategies of diet modulation include intermittent fasting and reverse feeding. Intermittently fasted mice fed on a high-fat diet showed decreased obesity, altered gut microbial profile, and an increase in gut bacteria-derived acetate and lactate 164 . However, upon depletion of the gut microbiota, intermittent fasting had no protective role. Thus, altered dietary patterns upon circadian disruption can affect host diurnal rhythms by shaping the microbiota, and timed feeding can alleviate the effects. Recent studies suggest that host epigenetic pathways play a role in circadian disruption and recovery, which can be modulated by diet and microbial metabolic activity. For instance, high-fat diet alters the gut microbiome before the development of obesity and leads to changes in H3K27ac and H3K4me1 patterns in mice 90 . This epigenetic reprogramming predisposes mice to obesity by orchestrating transcriptomic changes. Another study reported that jet lag induced obesity, but this effect was abolished in mice lacking HDAC3 in IECs 81 . Brown et al . 2021 163 showed that TRF-modulated glucose metabolism depended on epigenetic changes. TRF also enhanced rhythmicity of gene expression in the fly gut and this was partly due to changes of histone acetylation 39 . Although the exact mechanisms were not investigated in these studies, other studies have suggested possible roles of microbial metabolites in circadian disruption and recovery. The levels of some SCFAs were rhythmic in feces 165 , however, high-fat diet, shift work and jet lag disrupted these rhythms 59 , 166 , 167 . Introducing SCFAs in both organoid and mouse models can help induce circadian clock entrainment 134 , 168 , and this is partly dependent on histone deacetylase. Fiber-rich diets can also facilitate SCFA production and circadian clock entrainment 168 . Other microbial metabolites can also modulate circadian clock activity 56 , 169 . For example, polyamines like spermidine, spermine and putrescine undergo diurnal oscillations in the liver and modulate period length by altering the interaction between clock components PER2 and CRY1 169 . These metabolites can be synthesized by the gut microbiota 170 and target epigenetic modifiers like HDACs and LSD1 171 . Therefore, the microbiota could act in concert with the diet to modulate host circadian rhythms Via epigenetic modifications. It is an exciting direction to explore whether circadian rhythm disruptions can be rescued by targeting the microbiota-epigenetic circuit or manipulating the diet. Specifically, TRF has been explored for rescuing metabolic functions in humans. For example, one study in human males showed that TRF (without controlling for dietary variations) improved gut microbiome diversity and decreased proinflammatory cytokines 172 . However, variability exists in human TRF studies, probably due to differences in study design, geographical differences, sample sizes and meal variations 173 . Studies in mice and flies involve compositionally defined diets. However, human dietary composition varies from meal to meal. If diet composition and timing alter microbiota composition and abundance, how drastically do these changes affect host physiology? Are there buffering mechanisms in the host that can dampen the effects of diet variability? Thus, the mechanism of modulation of microbiota-epigenetic circuits by diet and their implications in circadian physiology needs further investigation. Emerging tools to study microbiota-circadian interactions The microbiota comprises &gt;1000 species of microbes which makes it difficult to modulate, perturb, and understand experimental variables, paving way for artificially reconstructed synthetic microbiomes and combining them with other multi-omics approaches to understand metabolome-microbiome dynamics 174 . Defined microbiomes with predetermined number of microbial compositions have been reported since 2008 and are ever expanding 175 . These controlled microbiomes can be used as training datasets for computational models that are used in microbiome-metabolite integration studies and help model ecological hierarchy and interactions among microbial communities, which is an understudied aspect in microbiota analyses. The gut microbiota-derived metabolites can be used as diagnostic and therapeutic tools as they are key to microbiota-host crosstalk 101 , 176 . Another application of synthetic microbiomes is to generate a non-rhythmic microbiome, that could be the key to teasing apart the effects observed by the mere presence of a microbiome and those caused by oscillations of a microbiome. New omics and multi-omics approaches can boost our understanding of microbiome-circadian interactions. For example, single-cell transcriptome and chromatin profiling techniques would facilitate studies on circadian rhythm heterogeneity defined by different cellular and chromatin contexts. Multi-omics approaches are also critical for understanding the interactions between microbiota, epigenetic pathways, and circadian gene expression programs. For example, combining metagenomics and metabolomics would help the understanding of bacterial mechanisms for producing bioactive molecules. Incorporating chromatin profiling approaches in host cells would allow the identification of new mechanisms by which the microbiota impacts host epigenetic states. Analyzing these big multi-omics datasets requires proper computational models and tools. For example, tools like MetaboAnalyst 177 can integrate transcriptomic and metabolomic data. Similarly, tools can be developed to incorporate epigenetics, microbiota composition and metabolomics approaches. Current state-of-art tools like mmvec, Songbird, reverse microbial ecology, Procrustes analysis, utilize combinations of molecular networking to draw links by utilizing reference datasets, including data from isolated microbial cultures and CorNetwork analysis between microbiome and metabolomics are emerging 178 , 179 . Tools like MelonnPan utilize metabolomics and metagenomics trained machine learning models to predict the metabolome of microbial communities 179 . Bayesian methods, network approaches, artificial intelligence, pattern-fusion based approaches, similarity based approaches and other multivariate approaches form the basis of multi-omics data mining algorithms, some examples being Galaxy, O-Miner and Omics Discovery Index, which allow incorporation of multi-omics data 180 – 182 . Collectively, our review highlights the gut microbiota as an important factor that regulates host circadian rhythms and maintains just-in-time metabolic and immune functions. One key mechanism is through epigenetic regulation such as histone modification. Future studies will likely elucidate how the gut microbiota impacts rhythmic chromatin states and transcription and directs timely host physiological functions in concert with environmental changes. Understanding the time-of-day differences in host-microbial interactions may suggest new therapeutic strategies against various human diseases by targeting the microbiota or epigenetic machinery. Significance. Circadian rhythms synchronize organismal physiology to environmental cues and enhance survival. The molecular circadian oscillator employs post-translational histone modifications to generate rhythmicity in downstream gene expression. Circadian physiology is highly amenable to changes in the environment. The gut microbiota is one such environmental factor that can modulate circadian physiology and host epigenetic states via metabolites and cellular components. Host epigenetic modifications offer a regulated mode of fine-tuning gene expression because the epigenetic machinery can be targeted by Small molecules such as microbiota-derived components. Microbial components including different SCFAs, inositol phosphate, flagellin and LPS are known to modulate different histone modifiers and marks such as acetylation, methylation, and phosphorylation. Although underscored, circadian rhythms result in temporal partitioning of physiological processes, and the time of day is often not factored enough into many studies involving microbiota-host interactions. We reveal multiple underexplored avenues to study the rhythmicity of different histone modifiers and marks in the context of microbiota-regulation. Incorporating interactions between the gut microbiota and histone modifications in circadian biology is key to understanding lipid and glucose metabolism, immune response, physical activity, and other vital processes which need to be explored further for tripartite interactions between the gut microbiota, histone modifications and circadian rhythms. Despite the complexity in host-microbial interactions, studies that incorporate the microbiota-epigenetic axis to regulate circadian rhythms and the roles of sex and diet in this regulation are highly warranted as they offer new insights into host biology and disease states. New tools and resources can be employed to overcome some of these challenges and enable better understanding of the mechanistic role of the microbiota in modulating host circadian rhythms. Acknowledgements This work was supported by NIH grants DP2DK136278 and R00DK1208978, the Charles E. Kaufman Foundation and the Shurl and Kay Curci Foundation. We thank the members of the Kuang lab for valuable discussions and apologize to other researchers for the omission of their relevant work owing to space constraints. We thank the two anonymous reviewers for their insightful comments and suggestions. Footnotes Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain. Declaration of Interests The authors declare no competing interests.