ABSTRACT. The identification of factors that influence the distribution of visceral leishmaniasis (VL) is key for future surveillance and control. This study sought to understand how environmental and climate variables can interfere with VL expansion in the Doce River basin located in Brazil. This ecological study explored the influence of anthropogenic, environmental, and climatic factors on VL expansion. Ecological niche modeling was used to assess the current situation and predict the future spread of the disease. The study used 855 human cases of VL recorded in the Doce River basin from 2001-2018 and analyzed them within the context of climatic and environmental variables. To model the current and future distributions, MaxEnt with the kuenm R package was used. To model the future projections, the global climate model of the National Centre for Meteorological Research (CNRM-CM6-1) was used as well as two Shared Socioeconomic Pathways (SSP370 and SSP585) for 2021–2040 and 2061–2080. Variables that contributed to the VL distribution were the human footprint index (62.6%), isothermality (28.1%), precipitation during the wettest month (6.4%), and temperature during the hottest month (3.8%). Future climate change scenarios showed areas suitable for the disease increasing over time (by about 7% between 2021 and 2041 and about 12% between 2061 and 2080) and the maintenance of the disease in places already considered endemic. Our results demonstrate the importance of anthropic and climatic factors in VL expansion. We hope that these results will contribute to boosting surveillance and vector control programs along the Doce River basin. INTRODUCTION A change in the distribution of diseases transmitted by insect vectors can occur with increased greenhouse gas emissions, imposing larger efforts to ensure human and planetary health. 1 Although economic development, public health interventions, and medical advances have reduced the global burden of infectious diseases, climate change can undermine all of these eradication efforts as it can alter the distribution of pathogens globally, allowing the emergence of new infections, particularly those transmitted by vectors. 2 Visceral leishmaniasis (VL) is an important neglected tropical disease. It is a parasitic infectious disease that is caused by the protozoan Leishmania infantum (Nicolle, 1908) in Brazil. It is transmitted to humans and other mammals, mostly canids, by the vector Lutzomyia longipalpis (Lutz and Neiva, 1912), and it has domestic dogs as the main reservoir in urban areas. 3 Approximately 97% of cases from Latin America concentrate in Brazil, 4 and since the 1980s, VL has been urbanizing and expanding, becoming a serious public health problem, especially in urban centers. 5 , 6 The global risk factors for leishmaniasis include that it is largely associated with and prevalent in relation to changes in temperature and water storage, irrigation habits, deforestation, climate change, immunosuppression by HIV or organ transplantation, development of drug resistance, increased traveling to endemic regions, low socioeconomic status, and the importation of infected dogs. 7 Few works assess the combined influence of human, environmental, and climatic factors on the spread of the disease as well as the development of predictive models that can guide surveillance and control actions. This study sought to explore and evaluate the potential distribution of VL in the Doce River hydrographic basin, a region with endemic areas for the disease in Brazil, by analyzing the temporal and spatial distribution patterns of confirmed VL cases from 2001 to 2018 and identifying suitable areas for the disease currently and under future climate change scenarios. MATERIALS AND METHODS Study area. The Doce River basin is in southeastern Brazil, and it has a territorial extension of 83,400 km 2 , with 86% of the territory belonging to Minas Gerais state and 14% of the territory belonging to Espírito Santo state ( Figure 1A ). Total resident population is around 3.5 million inhabitants distributed in 255 municipalities. It is a basin historically affected by VL cases since the 1960s. 8 Figure 1. Open in a new tab ( A ) Doce River hydrographic basin location in Brazil. ( B ) Study design: ecological niche modeling process stages. ES = Espirito Santo; IBGE = Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics; INPE = National Institute for Space Research; MG = Minas Gerais; NASA = National Aeronautics and Space Administration; RJ = Rio de Janeiro; SINAN = Notifiable Diseases Information System; VL = visceral leishmaniasis. Study design. An ecological study was carried out to explore the influence of anthropogenic, environmental, and climatic factors on the expansion of VL. Ecological niche modeling was used as shown in Figure 1B , and it consisted of 1) assembling a database of VL occurrences and bioclimatic (present and future), environmental, and anthropogenic variables; 2) data curation; 3) model construction; 4) model evaluation; 5) delimitation of potential distribution (current and future); and 6) analysis of the risk model extrapolation. Human VL database occurrences. Occurrence records of VL from 2001 to 2018 were obtained from the Leishmaniasis Technical Group of the Health Surveillance Department of the Brazilian Ministry of Health. All of the analyses were made anonymously; only addresses and variables related to positive diagnoses were included. Of the 3,847 suspected VL cases, 855 cases were positive for the disease as confirmed through parasitological and immunological tests. These positive cases went through a geocoding process that was carried out in three phases: 1) standardization of addresses, 2) geocoding using the eZGeocode complement of the Google spreadsheet that uses the Google Maps Geocoding application programming interface application, and 3) manual intervention. After georeferencing, we generated a kernel density map ( Supplemental Figure 1 ) in ArcMap 10.3 (ESRI, Redlands, CA). 9 Before calibrating the ecological niche model, occurrences of the disease were thinned with a spatial filter of 10 km using the spThin R package (Vienna, Austria), 10 which is known to eliminate strong spatial autocorrelation, sampling biases, and consequent model overfitting to environmental conditions. 11 After this step, 84 disease occurrence records were retained for the modeling process. Bioclimatic, environmental, and anthropogenic variables database. The study compiled 28 variables of theoretical potential to explain the distribution of the disease: 19 bioclimatic variables from WorldClim ( https://www.worldclim.org ); 4 environmental variables (altitude, slope, drainage density, and height above the nearest drainage) available from the National Institute for Space Research (INPE; http://www.dpi.inpe.br/Ambdata/ ); and 5 biotic/anthropic variables: tree cover percentage available from INPE, richness in mammal species, human footprint (HFP) available from the Center for International Earth Science Information Network ( http://www.ciesin.org/ ), Gross Domestic Product per capita, and population available from the Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics ( https://www.ibge.gov.br/ ) ( Supplemental Table 1 ). All variables were natively used or resampled to 30-arc seconds spatial resolution using the nearest neighbor join method in ArcMap 10.3. Before modeling, the least correlated variables that contributed more to our modeling framework in MaxEnt (New York City, NY) were selected. The jackknife test in MaxEnt and collinearity analysis using Spearman correlation in R were used. The original predictor variables with a correlation greater than 0.7 and lower contributions were eliminated. Also, four layers that combine precipitation and temperature information into the same layer (bio 8, bio 9, bio 18, and bio 19) were excluded as they present spatial anomalies in the form of odd discontinuities between neighboring pixels. 12 , 13 Eventually, there were six selected variables for the modeling process: bio 3, bio 13, bio 5, HFP, hand50, and elevation. Ecological niche model construction and evaluation. After selecting the most informative variables, the next step was to model the VL ecological niche using MaxEnt (v. 3.4.1) 14 as implemented in the kuenm package in R. 11 This procedure created 558 candidate models, with parameters reflecting all combinations of nine regularization multipliers (0.1, 0.6, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, and 10), five feature classes (linear, quadratic, product, threshold, and hinge), and two distinct sets of environmental variables. Models’ performance was evaluated by the statistical significance of the partial receiver operating characteristic curve with 500 iterations and 50% of data for bootstrapping, omission rates ( E = 5%), and the Akaike information criterion corrected for small sample sizes (AICc) to account for model complexity. This procedure enabled the selection of the best models whenever they were statistically significant and presented omission rates of ≤5%. Then, within this model set, models with delta AICc values of less than or equal to two were chosen as final models. 11 Potential distribution (current and future). To estimate the effects of climate change on VL, suitable areas (square kilometers) for the disease were compared between present and future projections (2021–2040 and 2061–2080) for each shared socioeconomic pathway. To calculate the area, binary maps were built using three thresholds: the minimum threshold (the minimum training presence logistic threshold); the 10% threshold (the 10th percentile training presence logistic threshold); and the maximum threshold (the maximum test sensitivity plus specificity logistic threshold), which is a more conservative and less inclusive threshold that selects only areas with high-environmental suitability values for disease occurrence. 15 , 16 The maximum threshold created the final disease distribution and expansion maps. To model the potential distribution of VL on future projections, climate data from Coupled Model Intercomparison Project 6 available from WorldClim were used. The global climate model of the National Centre for Meteorological Research (CNRM-CM6-1) was used, and the approach representing specific future climate conditions, such as temperature and precipitation close to the average ensemble projection, was adopted. 17 Two Shared Socioeconomic Pathways (SSP370 and SSP585 in Supplemental Table 2 ) for future projections were included, with the first being closer to the global current temperature and gas emission trends. The second is considered a pessimistic scenario because of an out-of-proportion use of fossil fuels and temperature increments above 4.4°C until the end of the century. 18 The HFP variable was kept constant given that there were no available trends for the future. Ecological niche model extrapolation risk. To check risk extrapolation between present and future environmental conditions, the mobility-oriented parity (MOP) metric as implemented in the kuenm R package was used. 19 This metric consists of a multivariate comparison between the environmental combinations under the two time periods. It is useful to identify areas that should not be considered for interpreting the model projection. 20 RESULTS Spatial distribution of VL incidence rate. From the 255 municipalities in the Doce River basin, 30.6% reported positive cases of VL between 2001 and 2018. Annual incidence maps (crude and smoothed) were generated for all municipalities considering an analysis period of 18 years. There were no major differences between the crude incidence and the smoothed incidence by the Bayes method, so it was chosen to show the maps of the smoothed incidence. Throughout the historical series, it was possible to identify an increase in the number of municipalities affected by the disease, showing an expansion of VL in the Doce River basin. In the first triennium, eight municipalities recorded VL cases. At the last triennium, 31 municipalities registered more than five cases ( Figure 2 ). Figure 2. Open in a new tab Smoothed incidence maps of visceral leishmaniasis by three years in the Rio Doce watershed between 2001 and 2018. Contribution of the predictor variables for VL distribution. From the six selected variables, four variables explained the expansion of VL in the Doce River basin: HFP, isothermality, precipitation during the wettest month, and maximum temperature during the hottest month. HFP contributed 62.6% to explain the VL cases; this index ranges from 0 to 100, with 0 representing no human influence and 100 representing maximum human influence. Considering this variable, the probability of VL occurrence increases until a value close to 60, and after this value, it remains stable ( Figure 3A ). Isothermality explained 28.1% of the disease expansion. Isothermality is the relation between the mean diurnal range and annual temperature range. It quantifies how large the day-to-night temperature oscillation is in comparison with the summer-to-winter oscillation. The values (58–67) for the study area indicated that the diurnal thermal amplitude is higher than half of the annual thermal amplitude. That is, a lower daily temperature range favors the occurrence of VL cases more than a greater annual temperature range ( Figure 3B ). Figure 3. Open in a new tab Response curves for the probability of occurrence of visceral leishmaniasis for the variables with the greatest contribution: ( A ) human footprint, ( B ) isothermality (bio 3), ( C ) precipitation during the wettest month (bio 13), and ( D ) maximum temperature during the hottest month (bio 5). Precipitation during the wettest month separated a very rainy year—which seemed to be related to outbreaks—from others, explaining 5.4% of the model. The response curve for the wettest month showed that the probability of disease presence starts increasing when precipitation reaches 180 mm and keeps increasing until 340 mm ( Figure 3C ). The maximum temperature during the hottest month contributed 3.8% to the model, increasing the probability of LV occurrence when the temperature reached a value of 30°C ( Figure 3D ). Current and future potential distribution of VL. Of the 558 candidate ecological niche models, 554 were statistically significant, and 2 met the three selection criteria and were identified as the best candidate models ( Supplemental Table 3 ). Model M_0.6_F_qp_Set2 with extrapolation and clamping was chosen to generate the outputs. The current model showed suitability for the disease of 18% of the basin area. VL showed few signs of expanding broadly through the basin from present-day range limits. Under both future climate change scenarios (SSP370 and SSP585) for 2021–2040, it is expected that the suitability for VL reaches 24% and 25%, respectively. For 2061–2080, the area suitable for the disease corresponds to 27% for SSP370 and 30% for SSP585 ( Figure 4 ). The extrapolation risk analyses showed overall high climatic similarity between current and 2021–2040 conditions and a lower climatic similarity in 2061–2080 ( Figure 5 ). Figure 4. Open in a new tab Current status of areas susceptible to VL and future projections (2021–2040 and 2061–2080) under different climate change scenarios (SSP370 and SSP585). Panels on the left display continuous suitability, while panels on the right depict binary (unsuitable or suitable) suitability patterns for VL, with percentages indicated in the accompanying bar charts. Figure 5. Open in a new tab Model extrapolation risk analysis based on the mobility oriented parity (MOP) metric between current and future conditions. The MOP was assessed using 10% and 50% of the reference points (i.e., current time), with results displayed as a continuous gradient. Lower values indicate greater differences between calibration and projection conditions. VL = visceral leishmaniasis. DISCUSSION This study explored present and future potential distribution of VL in an attempt to detect factors related to the incidence, permanence, and expansion of this disease in the Doce River basin. It was detected that VL tends to be distributed throughout the basin, mainly along the main river channel and where there is a higher population density. The occurrence is explained by the set of three bioclimatic variables and one anthropic variable: isothermality, precipitation during the wettest month, the maximum temperature during the hottest month, and HFP. The two future climate change scenarios showed a permanence of suitable areas for VL concentrated in areas of greater population density, margins of the rivers, and areas of expansion, especially in the upstream southwest portion of the basin. The Doce River basin belongs to the Atlantic Rainforest biome and has substantial human development, inequalities, and severe environmental contaminations. Among these, a large dam failure in 2015 at an iron mining company at its upper stretch impacted the river to the ocean with contaminated mud. 21 Along with or because of its socioenvironmental problems, there is a sustainable and expanding presence of VL, a disease that is expected to be eradicated by 2030. 22 , 23 Today, VL’s most common transmission profile is associated with environmental changes that compromise the natural vegetation cover. Anthropic changes interfere with the epidemiological chain because vectors, parasites, and reservoirs need to adapt to the new environments, seeking new conditions for survival and favoring the approximation of wild animals to urban habitats, where sand flies end up establishing transmission cycles close to humans. 24 The expansion of this process to a continental scale in recent times may have taken VL to a fully anthropophilic and urban stage, moving from the original reservoirs, specifically Didelphis or fox species, 25 to domestic dogs. 26 In addition, air and water pollution and thus, a degraded urban environment may result in greater vulnerability of people to infections. Studies in the ecology of diseases have shown similar patterns for various other zoonotic diseases, and as for VL, one may expect higher exposure and infection in disturbed environments than in preserved ones. 27 – 30 In the Doce River basin, the areas with the highest occurrence of VL were those with greater human impact on the environment. The HFP measures the cumulative impact of direct pressures on nature from human activities, and it includes eight inputs: 1) the extent of built environments, 2) cropland, 3) pastureland, 4) human population density, 5) nighttime lights, 6) railways, 7) roads, and 8) navigable waterways. 31 The Doce River basin is a significantly impacted region with centuries of natural resources exploitation and no planning toward sustainable environmental strategies. From an ecosystem perspective, anthropogenic pressures, essentially deforestation to the establishment of cities, mine industries, crops, and livestock enterprises, resulted in the fragmentation of the main natural biome in the region (Atlantic forest), leaving a composite mix of different habitats. Since the VL outbreak (169 cases) in the 1960s in the central Doce River basin, researchers knew the direct effects of deforestation on public health when they registered that the area where VL cases occurred had people who had left nearby impacted and fragmented forests. 8 Initially, this region was covered by about 90% Atlantic forest. Today, only 5% of the territory is occupied by this biome; 80% is covered by pastures; and 12% is covered by cities, agriculture, dams, and roads. 32 In cities, changes in land use from rural to periurban and urban areas generate a large variety of artificial ecotones at both macroscales and microscales, which represent ecological interfaces where zoonotic agents circulate, infect dogs and humans, and get in contact with wildlife, potentially amplifying cycles of the disease. 33 In fact, in the studied area, 89.5% of VL cases occurred in cities, showing that the disease has an “urban niche” and that urbanization can be considered a driver to disease emergence and maintenance of the pathogen/vector. Urban colonization of the main vector of VL in Brazil, L. longipalpis , has been reported since the last two decades of the twentieth century, and it has been discussed as associated with the construction of highways, deforestation, and the network of roads and intensity of exchange between nearby towns. 34 Other studies that analyzed cutaneous leishmaniasis and yellow fever also found HFP to be an important factor in predicting the expansion of these diseases, although with less power of association. 35 , 36 This is possibly because of the epidemiological profiles of these diseases, which are more prevalent in rural environments than VL in recent decades. The three other variables important for our model were bioclimatic and probably related to the life cycle of the vector: isothermality, precipitation during the wettest month, and the maximum temperature during the warmest month. It was observed that a small daily temperature range compared with the annual temperature range increases the probability of VL case occurrence. The density of the female sand fly population reaches its peak 3 months after the maximum temperature value and depends on favorable conditions of temperature and humidity; therefore, climate changes, such as increased humidity, can contribute to the acceleration of the life cycle of L. longipalpis , and the increase in temperature can accelerate the development of immature stages. 37 At kala-azar foci areas in Mato Grosso do Sul state, sand flies show peaks in spring, summer, and autumn, seasons that represent the rainy months and the highest temperature. 38 In the model, the probability of VL occurrence increases when reaching 31°C, with maximum probability at 33°C, which shows that the disease (probably the vector) is affected by high-temperature anomalies throughout the year. In the laboratory, the biological cycle of L. longipalpis is shorter at 32°C (31 days) than at 28°C (50 days) or 22°C (79 days), thus favoring vector replication and consequently, the number of disease cases. The egg, larval, and pupal stages at lower temperatures seem to be prolonged. 37 The precipitation during the wettest month shows that the probability of VL presence is greater above 190 mm and up to 340 mm of rain. The contribution of precipitation during the wettest month was also used to explain the distribution of L. longipalpis in the state of São Paulo. 39 In other studies, the density of L. longipalpis was associated with precipitation between 62.5 and 170 mm/year. A significant relationship between total precipitation and the increase in the number of cases of VL was found in Belo Horizonte. 37 , 40 In Porteirinha, an endemic area for VL in the northern part of Minas Gerais state, the density of L. longipalpis was associated with rainfall during the rainy season. It is important to highlight that L. longipalpis larvae are terrestrial and not aquatic and that their main needs are humidity, relatively low temperature, and organic matter as a food source. Precipitation may favor the population density of the vector because of the increase in relative humidity because the vector remains in its shelters in low-humidity conditions to avoid desiccation of its chitinous cuticle. 41 In Brazil, predictive models of maximum entropy point to daily temperature and precipitation during the warmest quarter, 42 and the abundance of L. longipalpis is greater after the rainy season. 43 – 45 The species distribution model outputs matched with the current presence of VL in the Doce River basin. Under climate change scenarios, new areas currently unsuitable for the disease will increase by about 7% between 2021 and 2041 and will increase by about 12% between 2061 and 2080. The similarity was highest for 2021–2040, validating the model extrapolation for this period. Additionally, considerable areas for 2061–2080 were regarded with the least credibility; the predictions for these areas should be taken with caution as they were detected as areas with high extrapolation risk. Although there are no studies of the future distribution of VL in the Doce River basin, it was estimated that there would be an increase of about 26% compared with 1992–2002 in the number of hospitalizations for leishmaniasis by the end of the century in the southeast region. 46 Evaluating mesoregions of Minas Gerais, it was observed that the Doce River valley was one of the mesoregions responsible for the maintenance and expansion of VL. 47 The generated ecological niche model can be considered important for the spatial epidemiology of VL as it identified the set of environmental conditions for the maintenance and dispersion of the disease in the Doce River basin. Anthropogenic impacts were very important, and their inclusion in the model improved its predictive power. Added to this, urban areas can suffer from extreme weather events, such as increased precipitation and the formation of heat islands. A limitation of the study was that the predictive model was created using the current HFP because there are no future trends for this variable. As most cases are in urban areas, the influence of HFP may be overestimated; however, today, VL is an urban disease in Brazil, and using variables that measure the influence of human impact on the emergence and expansion of the disease is fundamental. The model did not include canine cases or vector density; however, canine cases are not mandatory notifiable, and it is common for municipalities to carry out canine serology on demand and not through census surveys, which does not portray the reality of the 255 municipalities in the basin. Notwithstanding, the model can be considered adequate because human cases result from a cycle that requires a vertebrate and an invertebrate host to occur. In addition, since the 1960s, epidemiological studies investigating human and canine cases in addition to vector density have been conducted in regions of the Doce River basin. 8 , 48 – 50 These studies may have contributed to the actions of the control program, influencing the incidence rates of the disease in the region and consequently, in the potential predictive models. CONCLUSION According to our results, VL is expanding in the Doce River basin, and future climate changes will favor expansion to areas where there are still no records of human cases of the disease. Public policies must be rigorous in the use and occupation of the land, avoiding the uncontrolled growth of cities that impact the environment. Actions aimed at reducing global warming are also important to minimize future scenarios of greater expansion of diseases. Supplemental Materials Supplemental Materials tpmd240442.SD1.pdf (152.3KB, pdf) DOI: 10.4269/ajtmh.24-0442 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS J. C. L. Monteiro, S. P. Ribeiro, M. Carneiro, A.B. Reis, and W. Coura-Vital are grateful to the National Council for Scientific and Technological Development (CNPq) for fellowships, and R. Vieira Duarte thanks to the Coordination for the Improvement of Higher Education Personnel (CAPES) for the fellowship. Note: Supplemental materials appear at www.ajtmh.org .