Search  for Es[AUTHOR]tial Co nstitue nts of Matter Through Methods of Particle Physics: 
Quantum Theory of Gravitation Leading to Unified Force Theory   
[AUTHOR]*  and [AUTHOR]*  
[AFFILIATION].  Philosophical description of these as earth, water, fire, 
air and space could not satisfy the urge of scientists who tried to find a s cientific description of 
these es[AUTHOR]tial components.  
At the dawn of the twentieth century, some such particles were recognized which are 
electron, proton and neutron. At this time Dirac combined special  theory of  relativity with 
quantum mechanics and deri ved the notion of anti -particles. High energy physics extended the 
number of constituent particles and their interactions as par Standard Model to weak, quantum 
electro dynamics (QED), quantum chrono dynamics (QCD) and strong interaction. It is particle 
physics which definitely showed the role of quantum force as the attractive force between 
unsymmetrical objects.  
Big Bang theory of evolution of the universe was found to be inadequate for  explaining  
the binding force of the universe. Alternative theory bas ed on rotation and revolution of energy 
plasma was found suitable for the formation and binding of the universe.  
Here it is shown that g ravitation and gravity are the effect of quantum forces in different 
degrees which bind matter by push -in forces from ou tside and gravity is the faintest 
reminiscence of gravitation. This idea finds support from particle physics to solve the 
misconception of gravity as attraction between matter and the failure of Einstein ’s search for a 
unified field theory.  
Finally, it is established  that high energy  physics  and particle physics cannot reach  so 
high an energy that prevailed in the early stage of the formation of the universe . However,  
finding ultimate particles is not solved  till today .    
Key words: Quantum mechanical basi s for gravitation and gravity, High energy physics ; 
Particle physics, Failure of Newton ’s theory, Alternative theory of creation of univers e        
____________________________________________________________________  
*Retired, Address for correspondence DD - 114, Street no. 269, Action Area I, 
Newtown, [LOCATION], INDIA, E -mail: [EMAIL]  
1 
 Introduction  
Ancient Indian philosophers regarded five fundamental elements ( Panchbhutani)  viz., 
Earth ( Kshiti ), Water ( Aup) , Fire ( Tej), Air ( Marut ) and Space ( Vyom ) as the ultimate 
constituents of all material objects . The first four were [REDACTED](394 -322 BC) and 
the Space was considered by Einstein as the source o f interconversion of field and matter. The 
scientists were not content ed with these philosophical description s of fundamental particles as 
a result of which intense scientific search was made by European researchers. Three particles 
viz., electron, proton and photon were definitely recognized  by the beginning of the 20th 
century . At this time , Einstein proposed his revolutionary special  theory of relativity and 
quantum mechanical description of motion  replac ed Newtonian classical mechanics. Pauli 
advanced his theory of spinning electron and in 1932 Chadwick discovered neutron as a 
fundamental particle.   
In the meantime, the British physicist P.A.M. Dirac attempted to combine the time 
independent basic principl e of quantum mechanics with Einstein ’s special theory of relativity. 
Dissatisfied with the ad hoc nature of Pauli ’s principle of electron spin which is not naturally 
occurring along with n, l, m as quantum numbers and the non -classical concept of orbital m otion 
and spinning of electron, Dirac made some bold propositions which were considered initially 
as the craziest of ideas. He proposed that : 
a) The idea of vacuum , filled with ether should be replaced by electrons  
b) The nucleus of an atom is imbedded in anti-particles of electron, proton etc.  
c) The spin and revolution of electron is a non -classical idea.  
d) There is anti -particle for each and every fundamental particle of the universe.  
Dirac converted time independent Schr ödinger equation into a form which co uld be 
solved for 4 x 4 matrix elements and imposing time dependency finally obtained 4 solutions 
[1]. Two of the se solutions could be related to spin of electronic motion and the other two to 
2 
 particle and anti -particle pair. Thus, spin became a non -classi cal description automatically 
produced without any ad hoc assumptions and the corresponding wave functions and their 
eigen values fully agreed with experimental observation s of the fine structure of hydrogen 
spectrum.  
Although initially Dirac ’s ideas were considered as crazy, soon came experimental 
evidences directly from  
1. Observation s of Carl Anderson [2] of the pre[AUTHOR]ce of positron or a positive electron.  
2. Support also came from “vacuum polarization ” [3] which recognizes slight change 
in electronic energy of hydrogen atom as well as deviation of magnetic moments of electrons 
which were carefully measured and gave expected results . Pair production and annihilation of 
electrons and positrons were observed fo r electrons with 1.02 MeV or more of energy.     
Scientists were next interested if along with the lines of electron and proton, anti -proton 
or anti -neutron could be discovered. As the mass of proton is 1840 times more than that of 
electron , much higher en ergy would be required to produce this particle which was achieved 
by bombarding proton with 6.2 GeV atomic projectiles. The anti-particle  of neutron as anti -
neutron (also uncharged)  was discovered , which could be identified by their mutual 
annihilation ab ility. 
  The particle neutrino with zero mass and zero charge  (like photon ) was suspected in 
β- emission from a single radioisotope which shows wide energy spread (from zero to a very 
high value) . This violates the conservation of energy and momentum. This  particle was 
suggested by Pauli in 1936 which carried the energy and the spin. This was indirectly shown 
by Cowen [ 4,5] for the reaction p + ʋ = n + e+. In 1935, Yukawa [ 6] suggested that nuclear 
binding force arises from the exchange of the particle of 2 00 electron mass. In 1947, Anderson 
discovered muons (µ+ and µ-) from cloud chamber photograph of cosmic radiation but these 
were rejected after further investigations. The pions (π+ π0 π-) were discovered from cosmic 
radiations.  
3 
 The known elementary particles up to 1947 are classified according to their 
mass/energy, charge, spin and helicity or spiral -ness.  Particles of small mass are called Leptons 
which include electron, positron and their anti -particles of zero mass. Then there are heavier 
masses called mesons which are intermediate in mass between Leptons and Baryons (higher 
mass). The anti -particles are defined as having similar characteristics as particles but different 
in charge arising from their difference in helicity. We depict different par ticles and anti -particles 
according to their definition (Table I).  
A few characteristics are notable in Table 1. Anti -particles are all produced by reflection 
in two dimensions. The se are produced by double type of reflection which is called double 
inversion quite distinct from inversion operator (i) which indicates f (xyz)                   f(-x-y-z). 
In case of electron (e-) converting to positron (e+), it is seen that no electron with zero 
charge (e0) is indicated. For all other particles (mesons a nd baryons) the zero charged particles 
are defined. It is expected that a positive (+) and negative ( -) on combination will produce two 
particles of zero charge. This is not possible due to annihilation.  
For π and k -mesons there is no problem, for both π0 and K0 are defined. In case of π-
meson, the mass of π- is equal to that of π+ meson which is greater than π 0 as electromagnetic 
field accounts for a portion of the mass. The nuclear field is much greater, so both the π-mesons 
include the nuclear field wi th negligible contribution from the electromagnetic field (this is 
also supported by their decay scheme).  
The mass of K0 is higher than those of K+ or K-. Here the higher electromagnetic field 
(arising from decay scheme) is to be subtracted from the nuclea r field.  i 
4 
 Table 1: List of Lighter Particles and their Anti -particles     
 
Class  Name  Symbol  Mass/e  Charge  Spin h/2 π Stability  Decay  Double Inversion  
 
 
Leptons  Electron  
Positron  
Neutrino  
Anti-
neutrino  
Photon  e- 
e+ 
ν 
𝜈̄ 
γ 1 
1 
0 
0 
0 -1 
-1 
0 
0 
0 ½ 
½ 
½ 
½ 
1 Stable  
Stable  
Stable  
Stable  
Stable   
            
 
 
 
 
Mesons  
 
 Pi minus  
Pi plus  
Pi zero  π- 
π+ 
π0 273.2  
273.2  
264.2  -1 
+1 
0 0 
0 
0 2.6 x 10-8 
2.6 x 10-8 
2.2 x 10-10 
 π-                  µ-  + 𝜈̄ 
π+            µ+ + ν 
π0                  2 γ 
 
  
 
 
  K minus  
K plus  
K zero  
Anti-K zero  K− 
K+ 
K0 
K̅0 966.5  
966.5  
974.2  
974.2  +1 
-1 
0 
0 0 
0 
0 
0 1.2 x 10-8 
1.2 x 10-8 
1.0 x 10-10 
0.1 x 10-8 K−            2 π- +  π+ 
K+       2 π+ + π- 
K01          π- +  π+ 
K02          3π0 
 
 
Baryons  Proton  
Anti-proton  
Neutron  
Anti-neutron  p+ 
p- 
n 
n̄ 1836.12  
1836.12  
1838.5  
1838.5  +1 
-1 
0 
0 ½ 
½ 
½ 
½ 
 Stable  
Stable  
1.0 x 103 
1.0 x 103 
  
 
n          p +  e-+ 𝜈̄ 
n̄          p + e-+ ν 
           

5 
  
In case of baryons, particularly for proton (p+) the case is interesting, as the  anti-particle 
p- is defined by double reflection of p+, we arrive at n0 and its anti -particle , anti-neutron is also 
defined. Thus, we see here a case where quadruple of nucleons is possible contrary to quantum 
mechanical principles where proton and neutron are assumed to be of same particles in two 
different guises.    
High Energy Physics  
Since 1947, with the help of high energy particle accelerators, a whole array of new 
particles was discovered which revealed that the fundamental particles are not stable and 
undergo continuous creation and destruction. Positron and electron are produced b y the 
collision of cosmic rays with stationery target s. W hen electron and positron collide,  they 
annihilate to produce two (or more) γ- rays. Behavior of other particles are  similar to this. Thus, 
high energy physics led to  the production of anti -neutron, anti -proton etc.  
Classification:   
These fundamental particles were initially classified according to their mass viz., 
leptons (small mass), mesons (intermediate mass) and baryons and hadrons (heavy mass). 
Further classific ation was made according to their electrical charges, spin, iso -spins and 
strangeness. These particles have also been classified  depending on their interactions . For 
example, baryons and hadrons show strong interaction s. Leptons have weak interaction; neut ral 
particles show negligible interaction and weak interaction is responsible for β- decay. 
Surprisingly, gravitational interaction was considered to be of no significance . These 
interactions are guided by some conventional laws. Classical laws control energy, charge, 
momentum and angular momentum while non -classical laws control baryons number, iso -spin, 
parity and strangeness.  
Claims of discovery of over one hundred fundam ental particles in the last quarter of the 
20th century, strongly suggest that not all these particles are truly fundamental. A proposal was 
6 
 made by G ell-Mann [7] that a lower level of particles is to be sought (quarks) with fractional 
charges (+ 2/3 and - 1/3 of electron charge). Curiously enough , pre[AUTHOR]ce of such particles was 
anticipated by Anne Basant and Leadbeater  [8] in 1908. Initially there were three quarks with 
up, down, and strange designat ed as u, d and s and their anti -particles as  u̅, d̅, S̅. Altogether six 
quarks are registered. These along with their characteristics are tabulated in (Table 2).  
     Modern theory which is usually referred to as STANDARD MODEL attempts to 
explain all the phenomena in terms of properties and interactions of t hree distinct type of 
particles – two spin -½ families of fermions called leptons and quarks and one family of spin 
1 boson called gauge boson which acts as “force carrier ”. In addition, there is one spin 0 particle 
called Higes boson to explain the origin  of the masses. All the particles are elementary without 
internal structure or excited states [9].  
Leptons and  anti-particles     
One of the 3 classes of fundamental particles in standard model with spin - ½ fermion 
indicates weak interaction . There are six known leptons which occur in pairs called generation 
written as doublets:   
                       
 where charges e-, µ- and τ- are the electron , µ-lepton and τ-lepton respectively. Associated with 
these three neutral leptons are electron -neutrino, mu -neutrino and tau neutrino.  
 
 

7 
 Table II:    Quarks, Anti -particles and their characteristics:                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
 
Name of 
Particle  Symbol  
Quarks  Approx. 
Mass 
(GeV/c2) Electric 
Charge Q  Baryon 
number B  Strangeness S  Charm C  Bottom B  Top T  
Down  d 0.3 -1/3 1/3 0 0 0 0 
Up u 0.3 2/3 1/3 0 0 0 0 
Strange  s 0.5 -1/3 1/3 -1 0 0 0 
Charmed  c 1.5 2/3 1/3 0 1 0 0 
Bottom  b 4.5 -1/3 1/3 0 0 -1 0 
Top  t 174 2/3 1/3 0 0 0 1 
 
Name of 
Particle  
Baryons  Symbol  
Quark 
Composition  Approx. 
Mass 
(MeV/c2) Electric 
Charge Q   Strangeness S  Charm C  Bottom B   
p uud 938 1  1 0 0  
n udd 940 0  0 0 0  
Λ uds 1116  0  0 0 1  
Λc udc 2285  1  1 1 0  
Λb udb 5624  0  0 0 1  
 
Name of 
Particle  
Mesons  Symbol  
Quark 
Composition  
 Approx. 
Mass 
(MeV/c2) Electric 
Charge Q   Strangeness S  Charm C  Bottom B   
π+ ud̄ 140 1  0 0 0  
K− su̅ 494 -1  -1 0 0  
D dc̅ 1869  -1  0 0 0  
D- cs̅ 1969  1  1 1 0  
B- bu̅ 5279  -1  0 0 -1  
γ db̅ 9460  0  0 0 0  
8 
 In addition, there are three anti -leptons:  
                              
The charged leptons interact both with electromagnetic and weak interaction while 
uncharged leptons interact only with weak interaction.  
Quarks and Hadrons  
Strongly interacting particles are called  quarks and their bound states are called 
Hadrons. Weak and electromagnetic interaction s are smaller in comparison to the strong 
interaction. Although only three quarks are initially proposed , six are now known to be existing 
like leptons .  There are six types (colours) occurring in pairs :   
                              [u
d]                  [c
s]                    [t
b] 
Each generation consists of a quark of charge of +  2/3 (u c t) together with quarks of 
charge -1/3 (d s t) in terms of e-. These are called down, up, strange, ch arm, bottom and top 
quarks. The corresponding anti -particles are defined  as:  
                                           [u
d̅̅]                  [c
s̅̅]                  [t
b̅̅] 
with charge of - 2/3 (u̅ c̅ t̅) and + 1/3 (d̅ s ̅t̅) in units of e-. 
Despite many attempts, f ree quarks were never been observed. Approximate quark 
masses are inferred from the observed masses of their hadron bound states.  
Strong interaction in the standard model is called quantum chromo dynamics (QCD). 
This is similar to quantum electro dynamics (QED) in that both describe interaction s mediated 
by spin 1 boson of zero m ass to conserved charges. These are called gauze  invariance with 
characteristic symmetry. In QED , gauze  bosons are photons. In Q CD, these  are called gluons. 

9 
 While photons that couple to the electric charge are themselves neutral , gluons have non -zero 
value s of the colour charges to which they couple.  
Before considering the impact of high energy physics and particle physics on the 
possible search of fundamental particles, it is necessary to consider the cosmological theory 
(Big Bang) and the alternative  [10] theory of evolution of the universe.  
Cosmological theory:  
In cosmological theory of evolutio n, spatio -temporal singularity is described as having 
spati al dimension of the order of 10-33 cm, temporal dimension of the order of 10-43 sec and 
matter density of the order of 1093gm /cm3. 
Einstein rejected singularity as a mathematical point from which the universe emerged 
but he accepted the pre[AUTHOR]ce of super -dense matter. It was believed that some twenty billion 
years ago the super -dense matter exploded. The matter then changed to a highly dense high 
temperature plasma which convert ed to particles and anti -particles . These were subjected to 
annihilation  and as the temperature fell , a number of excess nucleons and electrons were 
produced. Later, formation of light er elements like Hydrogen and Helium and still later heavier 
chemical elements emerged. During further expansion of matter and decrease of  temperature 
galaxies and stars came into existence .  
This version of the cosmological theory of evolution of the universe from spatio -
temporal singularity leaves many a question unanswered viz., how the super -dense matter was 
formed, how it suddenly changed to a plasma, how on cooling the plasma condensed into 
different substanc es. E ven if the sequence of formation of the matter, anti -matter, nucleus, 
electrons, element  like H or He or heavy metals are accepted, none of them are accepted as the 
ultimate constituents of the universe. Moreove r, it cannot explain the binding force of galaxies 
and stars and also the stability of the universe. So, on the whole the theory appears to be 
improbable, impossible and as best it can be considered as illusory.  
10 
 Alternative theory:  
According to the alternative theory of the evolution of the universe proposed in an 
earlier communication  [10], the super -heated plasma (4th state of matter) at a temperature of 
~108K and above was in a state of violent rotation and revolution . At that time,  matter was 
devoid of any symmetry. This resulted in a very high ly pressing  gravitational force which is 
particle ( quantum ) based and guided only by quantum laws. It is believed that the formation of 
the universe was completed in about half an hour time . It indicates that formation of stars and 
galaxies also resulted from gravitation . The attractive force between nucleons QCD (Quantum 
Chromo Dynamics) and QED (Quantum Electro Dynamics) took place leaving very faint 
residual force of attraction for leptons an d for β-activity. Ultimately , gravitation is a spent force 
which has done its duty in the formation of the universe , creation of its constituent matter and 
passed into oblivion with little chance of reappearance during the life time of pre[AUTHOR]t 
heliocentric universe.  
A clear distinction is to be made  between the gravitational force predicted by Newton 
(gravity ) and the force d educed from the result of the high energy physics in the last century. 
Newton ’s interpretation of gravitation was based on the conclus ion that this is an attractive 
force between the objects of the universe. Every object is attracting every other one and this 
was accepted as infallible. Under the impression of this definition, Einstein failed to unify the 
forces into a compact theory even after trying for 8 years. Weak gravitational force could not 
be brought under quantum theory  for which  unified field the ory remained unsolve d. 
Particle Physics  
By following the methods of particle physics which is based on high energy physics, it 
has been possible to see that gravitational force is a quantum force in nature. This is in fine 
agreement with the alternative theory of evolution of  the universe proposed in an earlier 
communication  [10]. 
11 
 This force led to the formation of stars, galaxies and everything within the universe and 
the forces make the pre[AUTHOR]t universe stable. This force is utilized in the initial stages of the 
generation o f the universe . It is also used up in providing the attractive force between nucleons 
(QCD) and electromagnetic force (QED) . A very weak residual force remains in weak 
interactions between leptons. Thus, the gravitational force is completely used up so that no 
trace of fundamental particle could be derived or imagined. This picture of gravitational force 
fits the bill of all counts and does not contradict any accepted theories.  
As we pass from low energy to high energy physics , we go down to lower depths and 
as the symmetry decreases we pass from a weak QED to QCD, where the realm of wave 
mechanics ends . We then pass to particle ( quantum) physics. Particle physics is an independent 
subject by its own right and its methodology is based on terse quantum mechanical calculations. 
Our interest is to examine whether the particle physics can throw some light in the prediction 
of ultimate f undamental components by which the universe is supposed to be created. We make 
a very brief description for the technique of particle physics in which unsymmetrical objects 
are treated by quantum mechanics.  
The pre[AUTHOR]ce of particle s and their anti-particl es are necessary consequence of 
combination of special theory of relativity with quantum mechanics as shown by Dirac in his 
relativistic wave equation. Interactions among elementary particles are shown in the particle 
physics by using Feynman diagram and H ole formalism . These are shown in Fig. I along with 
different types of scattering and exchange of particles – although this is not an exhaustive list   
 [9].   
High symmetry is mainly a property of macroscopic system. A sphere in three 
dimension shows infinite numbers of symmetry elements. As we go down, the symmetry also 
decreases and at the stage of QED and then to QCD stage only a single symmetry remains. 
Further down we see no symmetry and the whole attraction is gov erned by quantum properties.  
12 
     
                                 Fig. I:  Feynman Diagram [Time Flows from Left to Right]  

13 
 Gravitation is the most powerful quantum mechanical conglomerating  force which is 
responsible for the creation of the universe . It is also the binding force of the universe from 
which originated all other type s of interactions . They are nothing but different manifestation of 
quantum mechanical force.  
From symmetry consideration , we can arrange the strength of the interaction s in the 
following order:  
Gravitation along with gravity > QED > Q CD > weak interaction between leptons and 
β- decay process.  
This order is also supported by the consideration of decrease of energy along the order. 
Gravity is the manifestation of a weak for ce between planets  since  the force of gravitation is  
mostly used up .  
This description of the gravitational force and its reminiscence as gravity found support 
from the study of high energy physics where  Seiden  [11] writes “We might ask about the role 
of the  unstable  particles, the heavier leptons and quarks. Has nature just been generous with 
the number of possible families, or have they been crucial in the evolution of the universe? 
They are like dinosaurs,  remnant s of an earlier age  – in this case the very early universe where 
temperature was huge enough to produce these objects ….” “The very heavy top quark may 
have some special role in mass generation, in any case its very heavy mass may carry a message 
we do not yet understand. These kinds of questions  along with whether there is a deeper 
relationship of the several interactions to each other (and finally gravity) are some of the 
exciting forefront questions in particle physics ”. 
It appears that Seiden hit the nai l at its head although not exactly knowing the nature of 
gravitational force. Indeed, the nature of gravitational force, particularly the very small 
(negligible ) binding force  pre[AUTHOR]t in gravity  in comparison to other forces was intriguing to all 
particle physicists [9][11-13] . This is due to the mis -interpretation of the gravitational force in 
14 
 the theory of Newton which has been discussed  in a previous communication  [10]. Actually, 
gravitationa l attraction is the strongest of all interactions and this force is responsible for the 
formation and binding of the universe.  Figure II  depicts the inter -relationship of  gravitation, 
gravity, Q ED, Q CD and weak interaction.  
Conclusion  
1) Gravity is nothing different from Gravitation. It is the faintest residue of Gravitation. 
Misconception about gravity originated from the erroneous interpretation of Newton 
about mathematical vector to which Newton assigned cause while it actually indicates 
effect. Gravitati on and gravity are both push -in forces from outside. There is no 
existence of gravity as an attractive force.  
2) Moreover, gravitation and gravity, both of which resulted from quantum mechanical 
force are push ing-in matter in asymmetric (symmetry -less) states . This at once explains 
[14] the failure of Einstein to derive a unified field theory in spite of long search . 
3) Forces of interaction between masses can be correctly arranged according to their 
strength as:  
gravitation (and gravity) > QED > QCD > weak force s (leptons) and β- activity. This 
explains all the properties and justifies the alternative theory of evolution of the 
universe by implosion  [10] of plasma state of matter.  
4) Thus, the hope for finding the ultimate constituents of matter does not seem possible 
because high energy physics has not been able to reach the energy pre[AUTHOR]t at the start 
of the universe. At pre[AUTHOR]t high energy physics cannot reach 10-17 cm with 200 GeV 
which is the distance between the nucleons guided by QCD. With the attainment  of the 
TeV energy new idea might be expected.  
15 
                     

16 
 5) It has been possible to find out the real nature of gravitational force and gravity as 
originating from quantum mechanical force. However, for the identification of es[AUTHOR]tial 
components of matter we must wait for a breakthrough (conceptual/experimental) fr om 
future scientists. We are now therefore back to square one in the region of the terra 
incognita . 
Acknowledgement   
The author s acknowledge  the support tendered by Prof. Abhijit Chatterjee, Bose 
Institute, Kolkata during manuscript preparation. They are  indebted to [REDACTED].org  preprint 
repository service in publishing the series of papers without any prejudice and opening the 
subject to the science minded public at large for examination, acceptanc e or rejection . 
Reference : 
1. Dirac, P. A. M.,  The quantum theory of the electron, Proceedings of the Royal Society 
A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences , 117, 610 (1928).  
2. Anderson, C. D.,  Cosmic -Ray Positive and Negative Electrons, Phys. Rev.  44, 406 
(1933) . 
3. Lamb, W . E. Jr. , Retherford, R. C., Fine Structure of the Hydrogen Ato m by a Microwave 
Method, Phys. Rev.,  72 (1947).  
4. Reines, F. and Cowan, C. L. Jr., Detection of the Free Neutrino, Phys.  Rev. 92, 830 
(1953).  
5. Cowan, C. L.   Jr., Reines,  F., Harrison, F. B.,  Kruse, H. W. and  McGuire, A. D., 
Dete ction of the Free Neutrino: A Confirmation, Science,  124,104 (1956).  
6. Yukawa, H., On the Interaction of Elementary Particles I, Proc. Phys. Math. Soc. Jap., 
17, 48 (1935).   
7. Symmetries of Baryons and Mesons , M. Gell -Mann, Phys. Rev. 125, 1067  (1962).  
8. Besant, Annie, Leadbeater, C. W.,  Occult chemistry: a series of clairvoyant observations 
on the chemical elements, Theosophical Publishing Society London, (1908 ). 
9. Martin, B.R., Shaw, G., Particle Physics, Third Edition, John Wiley & Sons Ltd. (2008 ). 
10. [AUTHOR], B. K., [AUTHOR], S, Newton ’s Theory of Universal Gravitation – A Critique Leading to 
A Revised Version, [URL]  (2024)  
11. Seiden, A., Particle Physics: A Comprehensive Introduction,    Pearson Education, Lt d, 
2004, Indian edition (2009 ), Page 27.  
12. Modern Particle Physics,  Mark Thomson , Cambridge University Press (2013 ). 
13. Boyarkin,  O. M.,  Advanced Particle Physics: Particle, Fields, and Quantum 
electrodynamics, V ol I,   CRC Press Taylor & Francis Group LLC (2011) . 
14. [AUTHOR], B. K., Impact o f Propagation of Light on the General Theory of Relativity 
influencing  Einstein ’s Researches on Gravitation, [URL]  
(2024).  
 
