Introduction Towards the end of 2019, severe and unusual cases of viral pneumonia emerged in Wuhan, China. Subsequently, three months later, the World Health Organization declared this new disease (SARS-CoV-2, also known as COVID-19) as a pandemic. This worldwide health crisis has caused more than 600 million infections and 6 million deaths 1 . In certain countries, healthcare systems have come under significant strain resulting in intensive care units reaching their maximum capacity and a rising death toll. Health workers have been central in the effort against this disease, finding themselves on the front lines, facing exhausting workload, great uncertainty, and fear. Therefore, it is worthwhile to assess long-term stress, and burnout experienced by health practitioners 2 . During 2021, COVID-19 emerged as the leading cause of death in individuals aged 25 to 74 in Argentina and other countries in the region. Although the absolute number of deaths was low in younger age groups, the SARS-CoV-2 virus ranked as the second leading cause of death in people over 74 years old, following cardiovascular diseases. Mortality rates revealed a higher impact on the oldest age groups, with the highest number of deaths recorded in individuals over 55 years old 3 . the capital city and its metropolitan area constitute one of the largest cities in the world with a population of 15,257,673 inhabitants. To deal with the pandemic, the Argentine health system increased the availability of intensive care units by more than 40%. This involved adding beds, trained human resources, and equipment to provide care to critically ill patients 4 . The Argentinian health ministry reported in December 2020 that 60,145 people performing healthcare and administrative functions within the health system contracted the COVID-19 disease, constituting 4.3% of the total cases. Within this group, 362 died representing 0.96% of all COVID-19-related deaths, with a lethality rate of 0.60%. In this critical context, healthcare workers were at the forefront, actively engaged in assessing, diagnosing, and treating patients with COVID-19 5 . Several studies have documented increased levels of chronic stress, and burnout among healthcare professionals 6 – 8 . Reports indicate a high prevalence of psychological distress among frontline healthcare workers, with a meta-analysis suggesting that 41% experienced such distress during the COVID-19 period 9 . These findings are hardly surprising given the significant stressors faced by workers throughout the pandemic. The healthcare workforce faces higher levels of stress, burnout, and other mental health conditions compared to other professions due to the nature of their work, which can negatively impact their physical, mental, and emotional well-being 10 . The pandemic has exacerbated this situation, increasing the number of stressors, such as the overwhelming workloads, the growing number of cases, lack of protective equipment and treatment, feelings of loneliness and social marginalization, may all have contributed to the mental strain experienced by healthcare workers 11 , 12 . For this reason, assessment of mental health and psychological burden in health workers is essential in order to mitigate its negative consequences, such as reduced productivity, increased absenteeism, and higher turnover rates 13 , 14 . Moreover, the World Health Organization estimates by 2030 a projected shortfall of 18 million health workers, in low- and lower-middle-income countries like ours. This highlights the importance of taking action to adequately protect these workers from the potential consequences of their work 15 . In this regard, we conducted a study during the initial COVID-19 wave in 2020, in which we discovered that 40% of healthcare workers exhibited altered hair cortisol levels, a biomarker of chronic stress 16 . For many years, it has been known that chronic stress has detrimental effects on both physical and mental health 17 , 18 . The neuroendocrine hypothalamus-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis, with cortisol as its primary effector, plays a crucial role in mediating these effects. Consequently, cortisol has always been considered as the key biomarker of stress, suitable to be measured in various biological samples, including saliva, blood, urine, and hair. Among these, hair cortisol has shown to be the most effective for assessing prolonged exposure, making it the preferred marker for long-term stress evaluation 19 . Accordingly, the aim of this study was to evaluate chronic stress and burnout in a new cohort of healthcare workers from three different hospitals as well as measuring hair cortisol levels as a stress biomarker during the second wave of COVID-19 in 2021. The novelty of this study remains in revisiting the healthcare worker population from the university hospital initially examined during the first wave of COVID-19, while also expanding the research to include two additional frontline hospitals. By incorporating stress and burnout measures, this work provides a more comprehensive understanding of the psychological impact on healthcare professionals during the second wave of the pandemic. Materials and methods 496 healthcare workers from three different hospitals were included in this study. Two of these hospitals depend on the the city ministry of health (Cosme Argerich Hospital, n = 190; and Carlos G Durand Hospital, n = 150). The third hospital belongs to [INSTITUTION] (Hospital de Clínicas “Jose de San Martin”, n = 156). Individuals undergoing treatment with glucocorticoids or psychotropic drugs, those with hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis alterations, or a history of mental health disorders were excluded from the study. Moreover, individuals with less than 3 cm hair length on the posterior vertex were also excluded. The study employed a cross-sectional observational design. Participants did not receive any form of compensation for their involvement in the study, and all provided former written informed consent. The study was prior approved by the Ethics Committee of the “Hospital de Clinicas”, the Ethics Committee of the “Hospital Argerich”, and the Ethics Committee of the “Hospital Durand”. All methods were carried out in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki. Hair sample collection and hair cortisol measurement Hair samples were obtained using scissors from the posterior vertex, as close to the scalp as possible. Considering that on average hair grows 1 cm per month, in order to assess hair cortisol levels over the past 3 months, 3 cm segments were collected 20 . Each sample was stored in a paper envelope at room temperature until processing. Each sample was weighed, and cortisol was extracted and then measured using an automated chemiluminescent method (Immulite 2000 autoanalyzer, Siemens, LA, USA). The results were expressed in pg/mg. Hair cortisol concentration reference interval in healthy individuals with low levels of stress is 40–128 pg/mg hair (P2.5- P97.5) 21 . Epidemiological data and psychological tests All participants were requested to complete an epidemiological sheet: providing information on: age, sex, weight, height, family, medication, hair dye usage, shampoo usage, any cosmetic hair treatment, smoking habits, profession, workplace, and pre-existing pathologies. In addition, they completed the following surveys: perceived stress 22 , social support 23 . Perceived stress survey consists of 4 items, answered on a 5-point Likert scale ranging from “never” to “very often”. Social support survey consists of 5 items, answered using a Likert scale ranging from 1 to 4 each item. For the analysis, median values were used as follows, for social support (median score 14), perceived stress (median score 8). Burnout Burnout was assessed by Maslach Burnout Inventory - Human Services Survey (MBI - HSS), consisting in 22 items distributed into three subscales: emotional exhaustion (EE) scoring from 0 to 54, depersonalization (DP) scoring from 0 to 30 and personal accomplishment (PA) scoring from 0 to 48. Item responses range from 0 (never) to 6 (every day) 24 . High EE (score &gt; 26), high DP (score &gt; 9) and low PA (score &lt; 34) are required to define Burnout. The reliability of MBI – HSS inventory 25 has been tested in human services workers and nurses from Europe and the United States 26 . Statistical analyses Initially, we assessed the distribution of variables using normality tests (kurtosis and skewness). Results were presented as mean ± standard deviation (SD) or median (range), depending on the distribution of the data. Pearson test (for parametrically distributed data) or the Spearman test (for non-parametrically distributed data) were employed to evaluate correlations between variables. Depending on the data distribution, median differences were tested using either the t-test or the Mann–Whitney test. For scenarios involving more than two groups, Kruskal-Wallis test was applied to assess differences between medians. A binary logistic regression analysis was performed to explore whether hair cortisol, perceived stress, and social support could predict burnout while controlling for confounding factors such as age and BMI. Finally, a mediation analysis was performed using Hayes PRO- CESS macro in SPSS statistical software 27 . This analysis examines whether the effect of an independent variable (X) on a dependent variable (Y) is transmitted through a third variable, called the mediator (M). Results Sociodemographic and psychological characteristics of the study population A total of 496 healthcare workers samples from Cosme Argerich Hospital, Hospital de Clínicas “Jose de San Martin” and Carlos G Durand Hospital were studied. Sociodemographic data is presented in Table 1 as well as medians (range) of each burnout component: depersonalization (DP), emotional exhaustion (EE), personal accomplishment (PA), as well as perceived stress, social support, and Holmes-Rahe. Table 1. Sociodemographic and psychological characteristics of the study population. Variable Results Age (years, mean ± SD) 42 ± 11 Gender % (n) F:88.5 (439) M: 11.5 (57) BMI (Kg/m 2 ) 20 (12–50) Average working hours per week 35 (5–70) Number of guards per week 4 (0–10) Smoker (%) Yes (18) No (82) Dyed hair (%) Yes (61) No (39) Cosmetic hair treatment (%) Yes (22) No (78) Anti-dandruff shampoo (%) Yes (16) No (84) Profession/occupation (n, %) Physician ( n = 109% = 22) Nurses ( n = 76% = 15.3) Residents ( n = 61% = 12.3) Other health professionals ( n = 146% = 29.4) Administrative staff ( n = 62% = 12.5) Maintenance assistants ( n = 8% = 1.65) Auxiliary health technicians ( n = 34% = 6.85) Psychological scale (score) Median (range) Perceived stress 8 (2–13) Social support 14 (6–20) Personal accomplishment (AP) 37 (7–48) Depersonalization (DP) 5 (0–30) Emotional exhaustion (EE) 26 (0–54) Stress and hair cortisol concentration Within the cohort of volunteers, 10% of the population showed hair cortisol levels greater than 128 pg/mg of hair. Table 2 presents significant associations identified in the entire studied population. Notably, among individuals with hair cortisol levels above the median, significant associations were observed with age, workload, emotional exhaustion, and depersonalization ( r =-0.236, p &lt; 0.0001; r = 0.204, p = 0.006; r = 0.185, p = 0.006; r = 0.172, p = 0.010). Additionally, for individuals with a high-perceived stress score, associations were found between hair cortisol and age as well as hours worked. ( r =-0.270, p &lt; 0.0001; r = 0.146, p = 0.047, respectively). Table 2. Statistical associations in the whole studied population. Variable Burnout Emotional exhaustion Personal achievement Depersonalization Hair cortisol r = 0.129 p = 0.005 NS NS Perceived stress r = 0.269 p &lt; 0.0001 NS r = 0.102 p = 0.026 Workload r = 0.228 p &lt; 0.0001 NS NS Social support NS r = 0.183 p &lt; 0.0001 NS NS not significant. For individuals with a low social support score, associations were found between hair cortisol levels and age, the number of weekly shifts, as well as with EE, DP, and PA ( r =-0.234, p &lt; 0.0001; r = 0.199, p = 0.022; r = 0.136, p = 0.036; r = 0.167, p = 0.010; r =-0.171, p = 0.008). Burnout and hair cortisol concentration The 11% ( n = 54) of the studied population presented burnout (high emotional exhaustion, low personal achievement, and high depersonalization). Individuals with burnout reported higher perceived stress score and lower social support score ( p = 0.013; p = 0.007, respectively). Additionally, these individuals reported working more hours and performing a greater number of shifts ( p = 0.001; p = 0.003). Interestingly, the two acute care hospitals, Argerich and Durand, exhibited a similar percentage of burnout (13%, n = 25; 12%, n = 18, respectively), while the University Hospital reported a lower percentage (7%, n = 11). Stratifying the population by occupation revealed varying burnout percentages: 18.8% for doctors, 6.5% for nurses, 29.4% for residents of the different medical specialties, 4.8% for administrative staff, 12.5% for maintenance personnel, and 9% for health technicians. Finally, the binary logistic regression analysis revealed associations between burnout, perceived stress, and age ( p = 0.024, OR: 1.258 [IC1.030-1.536]; p = 0.025 OR: 0.894 [IC0.810-0.986]; p = 0.001 OR: 0.954 [IC0.926-0.981], respectively). Analysis of mediation Depersonalization was found to be a mediating variable in the relationship between hair cortisol concentration and emotional exhaustion (indirect effect: b = 0.0325, SE = 0.0138, CI = 0.054–0.0596, p = 0.019) as shown in Fig. 1 . The other components of burnout were also tested as mediating variables but no significant mediation was found. Fig. 1. Mediation analysis. Discussion Stress and burnout were evaluated in healthcare workers from different hospitals in the capital city, during the second wave of COVID-19 pandemic. In a prior study conducted during the first outbreak, we discovered that 40% of individuals had elevated hair cortisol levels above the reference value of 128 pg/mg 21 . However, in the current study, conducted during the second wave, only 10% of the population exhibited altered hair cortisol levels. The observed temporal variation in hair cortisol levels prompts consideration of factors influencing mental health throughout the pandemic. Mental health issues among healthcare workers have shown significant variation during the pandemic. In the early stages, when the spread of the virus was uncontrollable without any vaccine or treatment, healthcare workers tended to experience mental health problems more frequently. Concerning hair cortisol levels, only 10% of individuals exhibited levels surpassing the reference value. This could be attributed to the enhanced training of healthcare personnel in COVID-19 infection control, considering the experience gained during the initial wave of infections. Additionally, the advent of vaccination and increased expertise in patient management may explain the improved stress management in our population 28 . The prevalence of burnout identified during the second wave was notably lower (7% vs. 12%) at Hospital de Clínicas than the rate obtained in July 2020 16 . These findings suggest a positive trend in the management of burnout among healthcare workers at this institution, indicating potential improvements compared to the earlier stages of the pandemic. In the other two hospitals, the percentages were similar, with 13% (Argerich) and 12% (Durand), agreeing with those observed during the initial wave at the University Hospital. In these two hospitals in the capital city, we lack previous data on burnout during the first wave. Nevertheless, we could presume that burnout rates were likely higher among healthcare workers in these frontline hospitals during the initial wave. The mediation analysis revealed that depersonalization serves as a key mediating variable in the relationship between hair cortisol concentration and emotional exhaustion, one of the three components of burnout. This aligns with our earlier findings from the first wave 16 , where depersonalization also mediated the link between hair cortisol and perceived stress. These results suggest that depersonalization may be a critical pathway through which physiological stress manifests as negative psychological experiences, underscoring the interventions aimed at addressing this component to reduce the adverse effects of chronic stress on mental health and overall well-being in health workers practitioners, who are often affected by Burnout Syndrome 29 . This result is particularly relevant, since depersonalization has been consistently associated with significant stress levels, and emotional hyperactivity in various studies 30 . Additionally, existing research indicates that when individuals lack personal resources to cope with conflict situations, depersonalization often operates as a dysfunctional coping strategy 31 . Conclusion In summary, this study emphasizes the persistent mental health challenges faced by healthcare workers, particularly in the realms of stress. It sheds light on the intricate interplay between psychological factors, cortisol levels, and burnout. Addressing these challenges and promoting mental well-being among healthcare professionals remain crucial priorities to ensure the resilience and effectiveness of the healthcare workforce in times of crisis. Further research and targeted interventions should be explored to support the mental health needs of these essential frontline workers. Declarations Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests. Footnotes Please see the notice for more detail: [DOI] Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations. F. [AUTHOR] and D. [AUTHOR] contributed equally to this work.