Abstract Objective Little is known about the effect of a multi-drug weight loss strategy in obesity treatment, particularly combining bupropion/naltrexone and glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1) analogue. The purpose of this study was to evaluate if there are any additive effects of prescribing bupropion/naltrexone on top of GLP-1 analogue as weight loss therapy. Methods This was a retrospective cohort study of adult patients with a body mass index (BMI) ≥ 30 kg/m 2 prescribed GLP-1 analogue therapy at an obesity specialist clinic in [CITY], [COUNTRY]. We compared a 6 and 12-month change in total body weight loss (TBWL) for those receiving monotherapy from the initiation of GLP-1 analogue therapy with those receiving combination therapy from the initiation of bupropion/naltrexone added-on therapy. Patients prescribed combination therapy were stratified into responder (loss of ≥ 5% TBWL) and non-responder (TBWL &lt; 5%) subgroups based on initial response to the GLP-1 analogue alone for any amount of time. Results The mean weight loss among patients prescribed GLP-1 analogue monotherapy at 12 months was 11.42 kg, SD 9.95 (9.6% TBWL). There was no significant difference between these two treatment strategies overall (HR 0.88, 95% CI 0.68 to 1.14, p = 0.35). However, when stratified by response to initial GLP analogue therapy, the addition of bupropion/naltrexone was associated with a statistically significant reduction in weight in both the responder (4.3% TBWL ( p &lt; 0.01)) and non-responder groups (4.0% TBWL ( p &lt; 0.01)). Conclusions GLP-1 analogues are an effective treatment for weight loss, and the addition of bupropion/naltrexone is associated with greater weight loss including in patients who are initially non-responsive to GLP-1 analogues. Access through your institution Buy or subscribe This is a preview of subscription content, access via your institution Access options Access through your institution Subscribe to this journal Receive 12 print issues and online access ￥40,000 per year only ￥3,333 per issue Learn more Buy this article Purchase on SpringerLink Instant access to the full article PDF. ￥ 4,980 Prices may be subject to local taxes which are calculated during checkout Additional access options: Log in Learn about institutional subscriptions Read our FAQs Contact customer support Fig. 1 Fig. 2 Fig. 3 Fig. 4 Fig. 5 Similar content being viewed by others Extended-release naltrexone/bupropion is safe and effective among subjects with type 2 diabetes already taking incretin agents: a post-hoc analysis of the LIGHT trial Article Open access 03 June 2021 Mental health outcomes in obesity interventions with GLP-1 receptor agonists: is it similar to other obesity interventions? A narrative review with systematic evidence synthesis Article 05 January 2026 Obesity medications in patients with recurrent weight gain or suboptimal clinical response following bariatric surgery: a meta-analysis Article 17 May 2025