e purpose of this study was to develop and assess for feasibility and acceptability an intervention for formerly incarcerated fathers, co-parents, and their children. We created and implemented The Pathways for Parents after Incarceration Program (P4P), a multilevel intervention that focuses on strengthening positive parenting skills, building constructive co-parenting strategies, providing social support, and connecting families to needed specialized services. We delivered P4P virtually to three groups of participants, collecting data at several points. Results suggest that while the program was well-liked and appreciated by participants and parent coaches and had a positive effect on parenting skills and attitudes, recruitment and retention was challenging. Findings suggest P4P has the potential to support child and family wellbeing when fathers reenter by bolstering protective factors and supporting access to necessary supports associated with improved reentry outcomes. Additional research is needed to address feasibility concerns and establish program efficacy. Keywords: parents, incarceration, reentry, intervention, feasibility and acceptability Roughly half of men incarcerated in the United States are fathers of minor children 1 , with the impact of imprisonment disproportionately felt by families from racial and ethnic minority groups. Black and Hispanic adults, for example, are incarcerated at 5 and nearly 2 times, respectively, the rate of White adults. 2 While the vast majority of men return to their home community upon release, 3 fathers typically leave prison or jail without sufficient preparation for reentry, including a lack of tailored parenting-focused skills and knowledge relevant to reentry, 4 , 5 making their reintegration into their families’ lives complex. Due to structural obstacles to successful reentry such as finding employment, 6 housing, 7 health care and paying child support, 8 fathers often turn to their families after release for both tangible and emotional supports. 9 Further, as part of the effort to resume their role in society, fathers often try to engage with their children and work toward reclaiming their fatherhood identity. 10 A myriad of interpersonal issues however -- including mental health challenges, tenuous family relationships, and a lack of connection to other families with similar life experiences -- can leave many fathers at risk of family and personal instability. A growing body of research points to ways that parental incarceration poses serious disruption to children’s lives, increasing their risk for poor outcomes including substance abuse, poor academic achievement, mental health disorders, and involvement in the juvenile legal system. 11 – 13 Despite the challenges faced by both children and parents during reentry, evidence shows that fathers with incarceration histories often remain a part of their children’s lives and strive to hold meaningful relationships with them. 1 , 10 Effective ways are needed to promote and sustain positive father-child engagement including the use of constructive parenting and co-parenting practices during the reentry period. Focusing on fathers is also important because the majority of parents (92%) in U.S. prisons who report having a minor child are male, hence fathers constitute a notably large proportion of the incarcerated parent population in need of services. 1 The sheer volume of fathers in reentry from prison and jail each year, combined with evidence that they seek ways to maintain connections to their children during and after incarceration, 10 , 36 calls for attention to fathers’ parenting needs and their role in the family. Studies that assess father engagement have shown that children’s caregivers at home (e.g., mothers), as well as extended relatives, have substantial influence both on fathers’ involvement with their children 14 – 16 and on their successful reentry and assimilation into the family during the post-incarceration period. 17 However, the relative absence of intervention research focused on reentering fathers and their families post-release calls for work that builds scientifically rigorous evidence about how to help families reconnect and rebuild their lives after paternal incarceration. Existing Services for Reentering Parents Interventions that target parents are a subset of programs in the criminal legal system. However, the majority of such programs take place exclusively within prisons and jails. 18 Extending this work into community settings after release requires collaborative partnerships between and among prisons, jails, and community organizations that serve justice-involved populations. 19 However, research in this area is limited. A recent review of reentry programs for parents and their inclusion of families found few examples that included components that began in prison or jail and continued after release or were designed for parents in the community specifically for the reentry period after incarceration. 20 Another review of interventions for women in the carceral system found only two of sixteen programs with recently released women 21 , and notably, both programs reviewed served only mothers. While reentry interventions designed to target fathers exist, 22 they have significantly less systematic evaluation. A 2017 report examined parenting programs for fathers with incarceration histories, and while some spanned the pre- and post-release periods, ending in a community setting, 23 none implemented a rigorous evaluation design. Purpose The primary objective of this study was to develop and test the feasibility and acceptability of an innovative family-centered intervention for fathers with a history of incarceration, their partners (or co-parents) and their children. The Pathways for Parents after Incarceration Program (P4P) is an 8-week intervention that focuses on strengthening parenting skills, building constructive co-parenting strategies, providing therapeutic social support, and connecting families to needed specialized services. P4P was designed to serve formerly incarcerated fathers or mothers and a co-parent of their choice. In this study, however, we focused on fathers. P4P includes an adapted version of Parenting Inside Out (PIO), 24 , 25 a cognitive behavioral parent management skills training program originally designed for parents (mothers and fathers) in prison that yielded positive impacts on parent depression, child interactions, and police arrests in a randomized controlled trial. 18 , 24 To develop and refine P4P, we modified the PIO curriculum, collaborated with two community agencies serving justice-involved populations, and implemented P4P in the community. Moving beyond unilevel approaches that address individual persons’ needs only, 28 this multilevel intervention engages participants within different systems to address the complex needs of fathers in reentry following release from prison or jail ( Figure 1 ). Building on PIO and drawing from a multidimensional perspective 26 that accounts for strengths and disadvantages at the individual (e.g., parenting stress, motivation), family (e.g., dysfunction, support), community (e.g., social inequality, shared understanding), and criminal legal (e.g., community supervision, housing instability) levels, 19 , 27 we designed P4P to target key aspects of individual and family functioning. While we focus on feasibility and acceptability here, the conceptual model presents the context and intended outcomes for the intervention across time. While “reentry” is often defined as the period just before and just after release, we conceptualize this period as starting with incarceration and continuing with the release from prison or jail, but lasting until a father has reached a point of prosocial stability and social connection that will support success in his community and life. Figure 1. Conceptual Model for Pathways for Parents after Incarceration Method Study Design The Pathways for Parents after Incarceration Program study was conducted between September 2020 and March 2022 during the COVID-19 pandemic and delivered entirely remotely. The study was approved by the University of Wisconsin-Madison’s Institutional Review Board and pre-registered on clinicaltrials.gov ; a Certificate of Confidentiality was also obtained. P4P was implemented as the culminating step in a series of research activities 4 , 10 , 29 , 30 aimed at informing the development of the intervention. The program was delivered to three groups of fathers and co-parents. Recruitment and Consenting Participant recruitment occurred in a Midwest, urban city and surrounding communities through agency partnerships, word of mouth, and flyers distributed in community settings (e.g., transitional housing spaces, barbershops). Fathers indicated interest for the study by contacting the study team via telephone, text, or email. Then, research team members screened fathers to determine if they: (1) were at least 18 years old; (2) had been released from jail or prison within the last five years; (3) had a child between the ages of 3- and 17-years; and (4) played a parenting role with that child. Fathers were excluded if they had persistent untreated mental illness or had been convicted of a crime against their child and/or were prevented contact with their child. Eligible and interested fathers completed a consent process and provided contact information for the study team to garner interest and obtain consent from co-parents and assent from children. Co-parents were then contacted to assess for eligibility which included 1) being at least 18 years old and 2) the co-parent connected to a father deemed eligible for the study. The intervention was delivered to three groups of participants (father and co-parent dyads) during the study period. Given feasibility issues related to recruitment, co-parents were only included in the first two groups. Intervention Description and Curriculum The development of the P4P intervention began with the manualized curricula, Parenting Inside Out (PIO), originally created (and rigorously tested 18 , 24 ) for incarcerated parents in prisons. There are several versions of PIO including the 90-hour original version (i.e., PIO-90) and a shorter, community reentry-focused version (i.e., PIO-48 with 48 hours of content). Eight lessons from the PIO-48 version were identified as vital to include in the P4P briefer program (now with 16 hours of content). This decision was made with a community advisory board of researchers, practitioners, and individuals with lived experience and the content updated and made reflective of the more diverse population being targeted in the study area. The contributing researchers were affiliated scholars with relevant expertise. 18 – 20 , 32 The practitioners were from a well-established, local non-profit agency that provides services to men and women in reentry from jail and prison. The individuals with lived experience were staff from the same organization whose histories of incarceration and reentry were central to the decision-making process. In addition to shortening the curriculum length, the changes focused on ensuring that the content was 1) up to date (e.g., using contemporary examples), 2) culturally sensitive (e.g., using language easily understandable to people whose first language was not English), and 3) reflected person first language (e.g., changing “inmates” to “people who are incarcerated”). The PIO-adapted curriculum which constituted the first P4P component, included the following topics: 1) Getting Acquainted and Destination Adulthood, 2) Effective Speaking Skills, 3) Effective Listening Skills, 4) Effective Problem-Solving Skills, 5) Connecting with Your Child: 5a) Bonding through Play and Reading, 5b) Parenting Adolescents; 6) Bonding through Emotion Coaching, 7) Directions and Encouragements, and 8) Advocating for Your Children. The course was led by two trained parent coaches who had lived experience within the criminal legal system themselves and professionally, provided reentry services to adults being released from prison or jail. Sessions were delivered in 2 to 2.5-hour blocks held virtually using web-based video software. Participants used computers or tablets to join classes remotely, and when they did not have a personal computer or internet, a laptop or tablet and WiFi hotspot was provided at no charge (either delivered to their residence or picked up by the participant from the research office). Participants were asked to return their device at the conclusion of the study for them to be used by future participants. All other necessary program materials were provided including curriculum documents, supplies, and child-friendly activities (again, either picked up by participants or delivered by the research team). The second P4P component included regular child and family engagement activities that provided an opportunity to practice the skills being learned in the classroom and enhance families’ interactions with each other. Examples of this included kits that centered around art (e.g., family painting projects), literacy (e.g., poetry writing), or themed activities (e.g., holiday baking and decorating). The third P4P component included attendance at weekly, remote, hour-long peer support group sessions led by two therapists (male and female, both from ethnic/racial minority groups) from a community agency with extensive experience serving people from racial and ethnic minority groups (reflecting many of our participants) and justice-involved individuals. The purpose was to support participants in finding ways to address challenges faced during and after fathers’ incarceration with support from other people in similar circumstances and with related backgrounds. Fathers and co-parents participated in these sessions together, as well as the PIO sessions, fostering opportunities to build co-parenting strategies with input from both the classroom portion of P4P and the therapeutic group. The final P4P component included community-based referrals and supports through the partnering agencies with whom we collaborated. This served to identify and link family members to needed services that were beyond the scope of the intervention. Data Collection and Procedures Data were collected at baseline, post-intervention, and at follow-up. Specified measures were collected at varying times (i.e., feasibility throughout the study; acceptability at post-intervention only; outcome measures at pre-, post-intervention, and follow-up time points;). The results reported herein are specific to program feasibility and acceptability. Fathers and co-parents could receive up to $165 per person. Meals were delivered to participant’s homes during each weekly session (i.e., PIO was scheduled from 4pm-6pm; food for the entire family was delivered around 6pm during the program break; and the therapeutic peer support group took place from 6:30pm-7:30pm). Measures A baseline survey included an array of demographic and other characteristics used to describe the sample ( Table 1 ) and to test differences by enrollment status ( Table 2 ). Screening and enrollment data were collected to assess the feasibility of recruitment and included tracking the proportion of eligible fathers and co-parents who consented and enrolled, as well as the proportion who participated and completed the intervention ( Figure 3 ). Table 1. Sample Characteristics Fathers Co-parents n = 12 n = 7 Variable n (%) / M (SD) n (%) / M (SD) Gender Men 12 (100.0%) – Women – 7 (100.0%) Age 42.4 (8.8) 42.3 (14.5) Race White 2 (16.7%) 2 (28.6%) Black 7 (58.3%) 2 (28.6%) American Indian or Alaskan Native 1 (8.3%) 1 (14.3%) Mixed Race 2 (16.7%) 2 (28.6%) Ethnicity Latino/a/x 3 (25.0%) 2 (28.6%) Relationship Status Single 8 (66.7%) 3 (42.8%) Romantic Relationship 2 (16.7%) 2 (28.6%) Married 2 (16.7%) 2 (28.6%) Employment Status Unemployed 5 (41.7%) 3 (42.9%) Employed Full-Time 7 (58.3%) 4 (57.1%) Annual Household Income $1 - $5,000 6 (50.0%) 1 (14.3%) $5001 - $10,000 – – $10,001 - $25,000 4 (33.3%) 2 (28.6%) $25,001 - $50,000 2 (16.7%) 4 (57.1%) Education &lt; High School 1 (8.3%) – &gt;= High School 11 (91.7%) 7 (100.0%) Number of Minor Children 4.8 (3.2) 3.3 (2.9) Lived with Child(ren) Pre-Incarceration 9 (75.0%) – Currently Live with Child(ren) 4 (33.3%) 5 (71.4%) Number of Adult Incarcerations 11.4 (11.0) – Most Recently Incarcerated in… Prison 7 (58.3%) – Jail 5 (41.7%) – Months of Most Recent Incarceration 33.5 (50.6) – Time Since Release (Months) 8.1 (13.9) – Source: Author Table 2. Differences in Characteristics between Eligible Individuals who Did and Did Not Participate Eligible Enrolled but Did Not Graduate Graduated n = 20 1 n = 11 n = 12 Demographic Variable n (%) / M (SD) n (%) / M (SD) n (%) / M (SD) Sign. Age 35.2 (9.1) 36.6 (845) 42.3 (8.6) b, c Race c White 4 (22.2%) 5 (45.5%) 1 (8.3%) 3 Non-white 14 (77.8%) 6 (54.6%) 11 (91.7%) Ethnicity b Latino 0 (0.0%) 1 (9.1%) 4 (33.3%) 3 Education &lt; High School 2 (11.1%) 4 (36.4%) 1 (8.3%) &gt;= High School 16 (88.9%) 7 (63.6%) 11 (91.7%) Income 2 &lt; $25,000 14 (82.4%) 6 (60.0%) 8 (66.7%) &gt;= $25,000 3 (17.7%) 4 (40.0%) 4 (33.3%) Relationship Status Single 17 (94.4%) 10 (90.9%) 10 (83.3%) Married 1 (5.6%) 1 (9.1%) 2 (16.7%) Number of Children 2.7 (1.4) 3.1 (1.6) 2.6 (1.6) Lived with Child(ren) before Incarceration 12 (66.7%) 8 (72.7%) 8 (66.7%) Lives with Child(ren) after Incarceration 4 (22.2%) 2 (18.2%) 4 (33.3%) Time Since Release (Months) 15.1 (16.5) 10.7 (14.7) 8.2 (16.6) Notes: Eligible signifies individuals who met study requirements but did not consent and enroll or graduate from the program. Enrolled but Did Not Graduate signifies individuals who were eligible and consented but did not graduate from the program. Graduated signifies individuals who were eligible, consented and enrolled, and graduated from the program. Sign. denotes statistical significance between groups where a tests for significant differences between eligible and enrolled, b tests for significant differences between eligible and graduated, and c tests for significant differences between enrolled and graduated. p &lt; .05 1 Demographic screening data is missing for n = 2 fathers who were screened in and determined eligible but did not otherwise consent or participate in the program, thus making the total number of participants with valid data in this column n = 20. 2 A data-driven decision was made to dichotomize annual household income around the sample median, which was at $25,000; data were missing from an additional n = 2 participants who were eligible but did not complete the program. 3 The discrepancy between graduated participant ethnicity in Table 1 and Table 2 is in accordance with all participants self-reporting on the intervention screener and baseline interview. Figure 3. Consort Diagram of The Pathways for Parents after Incarceration Study Acceptability information was collected at post-intervention via written surveys and open-ended questions that were audio recorded. Program interventionists assessed acceptability using an overall rating of weekly content delivered to participants based on scores ranging from poor (= 1) to excellent (= 10). As detailed in Figure 4 , participants assessed acceptability based on an overall score of helpfulness and three items about perceived impact. Table 3 provides details on a series of questions asked about participant satisfaction regarding program activities (2 items), program providers and classmates (6 items), and program delivery method (3 items). A series of 14 questions ( Table 4 ) assessed fathers’ and co-parents’ perspectives as to how much their participation in the P4P program changed elements of their parenting attitude and behavior. Finally, respondents were asked if they would recommend P4P to other parents on a five-point scale ranging from strongly not recommend (= 1) to strongly recommend (= 5). Figure 4. Fathers and Co-Parent Reported Overall Helpfulness and Percevied Program Effect. a 1 = Not at all helpful, 5 = very helpful b 1 = very negative effect, 5 =Very positive effect Table 3. Participant Reports of Program Satisfaction Fathers Co-parents n = 12 n = 7 Range M (SD) % Agreement d Range M (SD) % Agreement d Overall, how satisfied were you with… Program Materials and Activities The materials sent home for use in the program [e.g., laptop (if applicable), PIO program materials, office supplies, and/or Wi-Fi hotspot (if applicable)]? a 2–5 4.5 (0.9) 91.7% 4–5 4.9 (0.4) 100.0% The child-friendly family activities sent home for use in the program (children’s books, small games and activities, art supplies, and big art project at the end of the program)? a 4–5 4.7 (0.5) 100.0% 4–5 4.9 (0.4) 100.0% Program Providers and Classmates The parent coaches’ teaching abilities? b 3–5 4.6 (0.7) 91.7% 4–5 4.9 (0.4) 100.0% How prepared and organized the parent coaches were? c 3–5 4.6 (0.7) 91.7% 4–5 4.9 (0.4) 100.0% How the parent coaches encouraged you and supported you? c 2–5 4.6 (1.0) 83.3% 4–5 4.9 (0.4) 100.0% The counselors’ abilities to facilitate the peer support group? b 3–5 4.7 (0.6) 91.7% 4–5 4.9 (0.4) 100.0% How the counselors encouraged you and supported you? c 2–5 4.6 (1.0) 83.3% 4–5 4.9 (0.4) 100.0% How well your classmates encouraged and supported you? c 2–5 4.4 (1.0) 83.3% 4–5 4.7 (0.5) 100.0% Program Delivery Method Using Zoom as an alternative to in-person learning? a 2–5 4.4 (1.0) 83.3% 4–5 4.7 (0.5) 100.0% How information was presented to you in an online format (e.g., screen sharing, Google Docs, watching videos, using breakout rooms)? a 4–5 4.7 (0.5) 100.0% 4–5 4.7 (0.5) 100.0% The online interactions you had with coaches, counselors, and other participants? a 4–5 4.6 (0.5) 100.0% 4–5 4.7 (0.5) 100.0% Notes: a Indicates items where scale reflects values ranging from 1 = very dissatisfied to 5 = very satisfied. b Indicates items where scale reflects values ranging from 1 = poor to 5 = excellent. c Indicates items where scale reflects values ranging from 1 = not at all to 5 = quite a lot. d Indicates percentage of participants who reported “satisfied or very satisfied”, “good or excellent”, and “a lot or quite a lot”, for corresponding scales. Source: Author Table 4. Self-Reported Program Impacts on Parenting Attitudes and Behaviors Fathers Co-parents n = 12 n = 7 Range M (SD) % Agreement 2 Range M (SD) % Agreement 2 How much has the program changed… Your ability to increase your child’s positive behavior? 1 3–5 3.9 (0.7) 72.7% 2–5 3.6 (1.0) 57.2% Your ability to decrease your child’s negative behavior? 1 1–5 3.7 (1.0) 81.8% 3–5 3.7 (0.8) 57.2% How happy and satisfied are you with being a parent to your child? 1 3–5 4.6 (0.7) 90.9% 4–5 4.6 (0.5) 100.0% Your understanding of your child? 2–5 3.6 (1.1) 50.0% 2–5 3.6 (1.0) 57.2% Your ability to stop and calm down when you are upset with your child? 2–5 4.1 (0.9) 83.3% 4–5 4.4 (0.5) 100.0% The amount of time yelling at your child? 1–5 3.3 (1.5) 58.3% 1–5 3.0 (1.5) 42.9% The amount of praise that you give your child? 2–5 4.2 (0.8) 91.7% 2–5 4.0 (1.0) 85.7% Your ability to clearly state what you want your child to do? 2–5 4.3 (0.9) 91.7% 1–5 3.6 (1.4) 57.1% Your ability to communicate clearly with other caregivers involved with your child? 1 2–5 4.1 (0.8) 90.9% 3–5 4.1 (0.7) 85.7% Your ability to follow through on instructions or directions that you have given your child? 1 3–5 4.0 (0.8) 72.7% 3–5 4.1 (0.7) 85.7% Your ability to punish your child effectively when necessary? 1 1–5 3.8 (1.3) 63.6% 3–5 3.6 (0.8) 42.9% How well you and your child get along with each other? 3–5 4.3 (0.8) 83.3% 3–5 4.4 (1.0) 71.4% Your ability to help your child live a good life? 1–5 3.9 (1.2) 75.0% 4–5 4.6 (0.5) 100.0% Your ability to make choices that will help you stay out of jail or prison? 1–5 4.2 (1.2) 83.3% 2–5 4.3 (1.1) 85.7% Notes: All items reflect the scale values 1 = none, 2 = a little, 3 = some, 4 = a lot, 5 = very much. 1 Items where father reports are missing one participant, yielding n = 11. 2 Indicates percentage of participants who reported “a lot or very much.” Source: Author Analysis Plan Measures of feasibility and acceptability were reported in the aggregate for all three groups, and by by father and co-parent subgroups. Summary statistics detailed participant demographics and rates of retention. Chi-square tests assessed for differences between fathers who were eligible, enrolled but did not graduate, and graduated. Post-intervention reports of program satisfaction were provided by coaches and participants. Descriptive summary statistics were used to examine participants’ satisfaction with program delivery and perceived impact for their families and on their parenting. Results Participants Fathers were an average of 42-years-old ( SD = 8.76); the majority identified as Black (58.3%) and were single (66.7%). Fathers reported an average of 4.83 children ( SD = 3.21). The majority of fathers were recently incarcerated in prison (58.3%; 41.7% in jail) and had been released for an average of 8 months ( SD = 13.94). Co-parents (who included romantic partners and extended kin) were, on average, 42-years-old ( SD = 14.47) with equal proportions identifying as White, Black, and biracial (28.6%). Full participant demographics are displayed in Table 1 . Intervention Feasibility As shown in the consort diagram ( Figure 3 ), 51 fathers were assessed for eligibility and 43 (84.3%) met inclusion criteria. Of those eligible, 23 (53.5%) consented and enrolled in the program; the largest reason for attrition was loss of contact. Of the 23 who enrolled, 16 (69.6%) attended at least one program session and 12 (52.2%) completed P4P. Co-parent inclusion hinged upon fathers’ consent and enrollment, yielding 12 eligible participants (a smaller sample relative to fathers given that co-parents were only recruited for the first two groups owing to difficulties recruiting both parties willingly). Approximately 58% (n = 7) of co-parents who enrolled went on to complete P4P. Demographic data were retained for screened fathers to help understand potential sources of recruitment challenges; chi-square tests assessed differences between those eligible, enrolled but did not graduate, and graduated ( Table 2 ). There were no significant differences across eligible, enrolled but did not graduate, and graduated participants in terms of socioeconomic variables, family structure, or time since release. That said, those who graduated from P4P tended to be older, on average, and more racially and ethnically diverse than those who were eligible as well as those who enrolled ( p &lt; 0.05). Intervention Acceptability Coach Acceptability and Participant Satisfaction Parent coaches rated each week’s content over the course of the eight lessons. Their acceptability of the parent management skills training was generally high, with an average rating of 8.43 ( SD = .37). Table 3 displays participant reports (means and percentage of agreement) of program acceptability in three domains: activities and materials, providers and classmates, and delivery method. Fathers and co-parents reported high levels of satisfaction about program materials sent home (e.g., laptops, office supplies), with 92% and 100% of fathers and co-parents, respectively, indicating they were satisfied or very satisfied with this aspect of the program. Fathers expressed more variation in their experience of other dimensions of P4P, however. For example, 83.3% of fathers reported feeling encouraged and supported “a lot” or “quite a lot” by the parent coaches, therapists, and their own classmates, respectively, compared to 100% of co-parents. Fewer fathers (83.3%) were satisfied with Zoom as an alternative delivery method compared to co-parents who all indicated being “satisfied” or “highly satisfied” with this option. All the participants reported equally high scores on how information was presented in the online format and how interactions were experienced online. Perceived Impact Based on 14 items, fathers and co-parents reported how the program changed a range of parenting attitudes, skills, and behaviors. Table 4 displays both means and percentage agreement when participants reported the program having changed an element of parenting for them “a lot” (= 4) or “very much” (= 5) of the time, considered by our research team as being a positive program impact. In areas that focus on negative oriented parenting strategies (e.g., yelling, punishing the child), participants reported the program as having less impact compared to more positive and strengths-based parenting strategies (e.g., giving praise). For instance, only 43% of co-parents (and 58% of fathers) reported the program as having changed their yelling practices “a lot” or “very much”. Fewer fathers and co-parents (50% and 57%, respectively) also reported P4P changing their understanding of their child. However, in other ways, participants reported P4P as having a helpful influence. For example, 91% and 100% of fathers and co-parents, respectively, indicated the program changed their happiness and satisfaction with being a parent. Other areas with high percentages of participants reporting positive impacts included skills (e.g., emotion regulation, communication) and positive parenting strategies (e.g., following through on instructions). Of interest, 75% (9 of 12 fathers), and 100% of the co-parents, reported that the program changed their ability to help their child live a good life. Participants also reported on whether they would recommend P4P to other people, how helpful the overall program was, and their perception of its effects on themselves and their family ( Figure 4 ). All seven of the co-parents indicated they would strongly recommend the program to other parents while 10 (83.30%) of the fathers said they would do the same. Co-parents reported slightly higher scores on perceived helpfulness of P4P and effectiveness for themselves, their partner, and their child compared to fathers. Of note is that both co-parents and fathers reported that P4P was most effective for themselves individually ( M = 4.57, SD = .54; M = 4.33, SD = .49, respectively), but least effective for their child ( M = 4.43, SD = .54; M = 3.90, SD = .57, respectively). Discussion Improving parenting outcomes for justice-involved fathers has increasingly become a focus of researchers, practitioners, and administrators because of the potential of family relationships both to help reduce the risk of recidivism for fathers and to prevent future offending by children. 18 , 31 As such, there is a need for research about evidence-based interventions that improve parents’ ability to be successful in reentry including in their relationships with children and co-parents. 19 , 32 As one effort to help fill this gap, the purpose of this study was to pilot and assess for feasibility and acceptability The Pathways for Parents after Incarceration Program, a multi-component intervention designed to increase positive father-child and co-parenting relationships, parenting competence, and reentry success. Intervention Feasibility Difficulties associated with successful study participation among economically marginalized and disproportionately affected populations is a common occurrence in research with justice-involved populations 33 and a problem only made worse by COVID-19. 34 Our experience was similarly challenging, and also severely affected by the pandemic with nearly every aspect of our study touched in some way. Families were stressed with social isolation, loss of life and illness, unemployment, and school closures. These social, health, and economic problems introduced feasibility issues we might otherwise not have experienced. We saw barriers to enrollment, with just over half of eligible fathers choosing to join the study and similar rates of retention and graduation among those who enrolled. Those who did graduate tended to be older and more racially and ethnically diverse. This may reflect older fathers’ developmental progression away from criminal activity and toward prosocial pursuits. 35 It also aligns with previous research that finds African American and Latino fathers to be more involved and to have more contact with their children than their White counterparts after incarceration. 36 , 37 The age finding has implications for future programming in that reentry services that focus on children and families (as opposed to fundamental needs such as housing and employment) may not necessarily be appropriate for all people at all stages of the reentry process. It may be the case that younger fathers find other services more helpful before addressing aspects of their life that focus on parent-child and co-parenting relationships. Despite the goal to serve both fathers and co-parents (often the mother of the child), we chose to restrict enrollment to fathers in the last group of P4P participants owing to difficulties successfully recruiting both individuals. Numerous times we saw instances where either the father or co-parent would be eager to participate but the other person would raise concerns or simply be unreachable. It may be the case that attention to father-co-parent partnerships during incarceration is needed before trying to engage both people in services after release when the strain of separation and imprisonment may have already taken a toll on people’s lives and relationships. Programs that engage fathers during incarceration and continue with them and their partners or co-parents once released, while logistically challenging, offer perhaps the greatest likelihood of successfully meeting both fathers’ and families’ needs and mitigating the effects of incarceration. 19 Our experience with retention was generally similar to other intervention studies with incarcerated populations which see attrition rates that range from one-third in prison studies 24 to over 70% in jail settings. 38 Among people who are disproportionately affected by incarceration, those in reentry are especially underserved by mental and behavioral health resources, 39 , 40 and are at risk for high rates of unemployment, homelessness, and the potential for recidivism. 41 , 42 It is not surprising with the many competing demands that fathers and families face after incarceration, combined with COVID-19 related challenges, that sustained participation was an issue. Future research should test approaches to successfully recruit and retain formerly incarcerated people and their partners or co-parents, including strategies from observational studies with individuals in reentry where success has been significantly higher. 43 Intervention Acceptability Satisfaction The P4P parent coaches reported the PIO portion of the program suitable, while fathers and co-parents generally also found the program acceptable including the PIO classroom component, therapeutic peer support, and family engagement activities. Both fathers and co-parents found the materials sent home satisfying, as well as the online interactions they had with coaches and therapists. This said, fathers experienced P4P slightly less favorably overall than did co-parents, with a proportion of them not feeling as encouraged and supported compared to co-parents, as well as not feeling satisfied with Zoom as an alternative to in-person programming. Although there are downsides to remote delivery (e.g., interactions feel less personable), this study demonstrates the potential for online (but live) programming. Advantages to the remote aspect of P4P included our capacity to serve people who lived further away than we had planned on enrolling and the ability to accommodate people’s schedules and their families’ needs more flexibly. But for some fathers, the distant and qualitatively different nature of interacting with people over video chat may have contributed to a less than optimal experience. This has implications for future programming that should consider both delivery options with a clear understanding of their respective tradeoffs, as well as research that may continue to require adjustments and adaptations while seeking ways to improve families’ functioning. 44 Perceived Impact Participants’ perceptions of how the program influenced their parenting attitudes, skills, and behavior varied widely. In several instances, we saw co-parents reporting P4P as having less of a significant impact on their parenting set of “tools” than fathers, and yet overall, more co-parents relative to fathers reported P4P changing their ability to support their child in living a good life. It is possible that the co-parents -- all women and mostly the primary caregivers of their children -- were less confident in their parenting skills, in need of more intensive and longer-term support, and more susceptible to parenting stress and strain compared to the fathers (many of whom did not live with their children). Parenting distress among co-parents who are in relationships with incarcerated parents is common; yet high-quality parenting can mediate the negative effects of a parent’s incarceration on children. 45 These findings raise the question of whether there might be benefits to serving fathers and co-parents for different periods of time and in different settings in order to better tailor programming content to their varied needs. Another central takeaway was that some participants experienced P4P as being less influential on decreasing negative disciplinary practices but more influential on increasing positive practices. This may have implications for the design of parenting skills programs for this population. Perhaps programs that focus on strengths-based approaches and that employ ideas grounded in theories of resiliency might be both more appealing to parents and effective in generating clearly visible changes within families, which in turn might reinforce further positive change. 46 Finally, while nearly all participants indicated they would recommend the program to others, and found P4P effective for themselves, they found it less directly effective for their children. It likely takes longer for child effects to be realized once parent practices have changed. This has implications for how long programs should be offered (e.g., longer may be better but comes with other disadvantages) and what else may be needed (e.g., child mental health supports). More direct inclusion of children in programs (e.g., opportunities for parents and children to directly engage) and increased efforts to address structural stressors (e.g., housing instability, poverty) could also bolster parents’ perceptions of positive child effects. Limitations There are several limits worth noting about the study. First, the study occurred entirely during the COVID-19 pandemic. As a result, we changed the research design so the intervention could be delivered remotely. While this brought some benefits (e.g., accessibility for people who lived far away), it also resulted in drawbacks such as a lack of community-building that we expected would occur naturally when participants and their children met in person. Future research should include an in-person version of the P4P intervention to assess for changes (and potential improvements) in participants’ experiences. Second, the study did not include a control group to rigorously assess effectiveness and had a small sample size. Although small by design for this study, future work should include a comparison group and larger sample size to determine if there is any evidence of impact. Third, data were collected using self-report methods which may have introduced bias into the findings. However, different members of the research team were responsible for delivering the intervention and collecting data thus mitigating potential response bias. Conclusion Parenting skills interventions for fathers in reentry, combined with co-parenting strategies with co-parents, therapeutic social support, and resources to address social and economic needs, are desirable and acceptable, but delivery of programs during public health crises like COVID-19 hamper feasibility. Lessons from this study will inform future research to further develop and test preventive interventions for justice-involved families. Given that the criminal legal system is fraught with racism and structural inequalities leading to disproportionate effects on individuals in poverty and ethnic and racial minority groups, 47 research and advocacy efforts must also address these underlying issues in order for parents, children and families to thrive. Figure 2.: Supplies provided to participating families. This figure is available in color online ( www.familyandcommunityhealth.com ).