health conditions also contributes to an acceleration of these effects and to sleep deficiency in particular. 4 Moreover, the unique changes to lifestyle, routine, experience, and daily stimulation or lack thereof, that tend to accompany aging and, in the western context, retirement, also can contribute to sleep deficiency. 5 Therefore, in considering sleep deficiency, we need to be aware of the impact of normal changes in sleep physiology that result from aging itself -and which occur in both healthy and unhealthy older adults- and of age-related changes to sleep resulting from the health-related and psychosocial/behavioral factors typical of aging. 4 In this chapter, we describe the syndrome of sleep deficiency in older adults, often defined as aged 65 years and older. First, we describe normative changes to sleep physiology, which may not be pathologic but nonetheless predispose older adults to sleep deficiency via changes in sleep duration, quality, and/or timing. Next, we discuss health-related and psychosocial/behavioral factors that precipitate sleep deficiency in this age group. Third, we review the consequences of sleep deficiency in older adults, focusing specifically on important age-related outcomes, including mortality, cognition, depression, and physical function. Finally, we review treatments for sleep deficiency in older persons, focusing especially on non-pharmacologic interventions, which are much preferred in this age group due to the potential for adverse effects of pharmacologic interventions. 1. Normative Changes to Sleep Architecture and Circadian Rhythm in Aging Sleep Duration and Quality Aging-related physiologic changes to sleep architecture are well-established (see Table 1 ). It has been shown that sleep duration decreases with age, 6 , 7 which may be at odds with a recommended sleep duration of 7–8 hours in older adults. 8 This recommendation is supported by evidence that older adults sleeping for 7–8 hours overnight have better mental and physical health, cognition, and quality of life compared to older adults with shorter or longer sleep durations. 8 Thus, the recommended sleep duration is not reduced in older adults, even though the ability to get the recommended amount of sleep may be decreased because of normal changes in sleep architecture. 9 Further support for the recommended 7–8 hours of sleep is the robust association of both shorter (6 hours or less) and longer (greater than 9 hours) sleep durations with adverse health consequences, including cardiovascular, metabolic, immunologic, and cognitive outcomes, as well as mortality. 10 Because of differences across studies in how short and long sleep durations are defined, the National Sleep Foundation recommendations acknowledge that a sleep duration anywhere from 6–9 hours may be appropriate. 8 Table 1. Age-Related Changes to Sleep Physiology Architecture Circadian Rhythm • Decreases in: - total sleep time - sleep efficiency - slow wave sleep - rapid eye movement sleep • Increases in: - wake after sleep onset - arousals from sleep - sleep latency • Phase advance is common • Decreased rhythm amplitude • Decrease in ability to phase shift Changes in sleep architecture across the lifespan are nicely demonstrated by two large meta-analyses. 6 , 7 Older adults spend more time in non-rapid eye movement (NREM) stages N1 and N2 , and less time in N3 (slow wave sleep) and REM sleep, 6 , 7 and also experience shorter and fewer NREM-REM sleep cycles. 11 Sleep efficiency (the ratio of time spent asleep while in bed) appears to be particularly impacted by aging, as it continues to decrease as a function of age past 90 years. 6 The observed quantitative change in arousal frequency from young adulthood (18–34 years) to older age (65–79 years) is dramatic, doubling from 9.6 to 18.8 events per hour. 7 However, increased arousal frequency does not appear to impact the ability of healthy older adults to fall back to sleep. 5 Other age-dependent changes in sleep parameters appear to stabilize by the age of 60. For example, there is an age-related increase in sleep latency and in wake after sleep onset (WASO) only up to age 60. 6 There are also significant qualitative changes to the microarchitecture of REM, N2 , and N3 . Older adults exhibit shorter REM latency and reduced REM activity and density. 12 There are also marked changes in sleep spindles with age, including a reduction in sleep spindle and K-complex density and a decrease in spindle duration and amplitude. 13 In older adults, sleep spindle frequency diminishes progressively over the course of a night’s sleep. 14 These changes have profound implications. Sleep spindles, a defining feature of N2 , have been associated with neuronal plasticity and memory consolidation. 15 Studies show a positive correlation between increases in spindle density and episodic learning, hippocampal encoding, and recall ability. 15 Moreover, sleep spindles may not only impact memory and learning due to sleep, but they seem to have an effect on the ability of a sleeper to remain asleep. Awakenings from sleep secondary to external auditory stimuli are significantly reduced when they occur during sleep spindles. In this way, spindles seems to be protective of sleep continuity. 13 With regard to N3 , a marked reduction in delta wave amplitude and density has been observed, possibly due to cortical neuron loss. 12 These age-related changes are more pronounced across the frontal lobe. 12 Slow wave activity impairment is dramatic in older adults, who exhibit 75–80% less slow wave activity over the prefrontal cortex during the first NREM sleep cycles as compared to younger adults. 11 Structural changes in the brain secondary to aging may have an important role in the decline of sleep duration and increase in sleep fragmentation in older people. 16 With aging, a small group of cells in the hypothalamic preoptic area, responsible for sleep initiation and maintenance via expression of the inhibitory neuropeptide galanin, diminish in number. The severity of this loss, observed post-mortem, correlates with previous sleep fragmentation, while a greater change is seen in those with Alzheimer’s Disease (AD). 11 Up to 50% of the neurons in this aforementioned region of the brain, referred to as the “sleep switch”, are lost over the course of the normal aging process. It has been proposed that this network of cells lose the ability to fire simultaneously, thereby impairing the brain’s transition from a wakeful state to sleep. 3 Circadian Rhythmicity Changes to the circadian system seen in aging populations (see Table 1 ) significantly impact the overall pattern of the sleep-wake cycle. Perhaps the most recognized change to circadian patterns is the tendency for a phase advance, resulting in an earlier time for the sleep period. 17 Many rhythms controlled by the circadian system reflect this advance, including melatonin and core body temperature rhythms. The timing of melatonin release has been reported to move to an earlier time with age. 17 Similarly, core body temperature peaks earlier in the day in the elderly and, in turn, declines earlier. Alertness increases as body temperature rises, while there is increased sleepiness with lower body temperatures. This pattern tracks neatly with the increased daytime napping and earlier sleep onset often seen in older adults, which occur as the core body temperature decreases. 4 A decrease in the amplitude of the circadian rhythm in older adults has also been reported. For example, there is a diminished range of temperatures experienced in the older population. 18 The most substantial discrepancy between the ages spans the “Sleep Propensity Zone”, which occurs between 4:00 AM and 7:00 AM. Younger adults achieve a more precipitous decline in body temperature during this time, which will act as a cue to maintain sleepiness. Older adults, on the other hand, have less of a reduction in their body temperature, a signal of a less potent circadian stimulus to maintain sleep. As a result, they may experience a greater number of awakenings during the night or awaken earlier in the morning than younger adults. 19 Similarly, a reduction in the amplitude of melatonin and other hormone rhythms has also been reported. 17 Importantly, most studies have documented an overall decrease in the secretion of melatonin with aging, though some suggest there may be no change in healthy elderly. This decrease in production is largely reflected in lower nocturnal melatonin levels. 20 Aging has also been associated with alteration in the circadian rhythm of cortisol, which may have implications for sleep. In particular, a marked elevation of cortisol levels has been associated with aging and linked to decreased N3 sleep and increased nighttime arousals. 21 A recent cross-sectional study found an association between sleep disruption on actigraphy and elevated daytime cortisol levels. 22 Older adults also experience a reduction in the ability to phase shift and to adapt to a new sleep time. 23 Evidence suggests that this vulnerability may be related both to changes intrinsic to the signaling of the circadian timing system itself as well as disruption of entrainment mechanisms. 24 An example of disruption in entrainment is visual impairment, which leads to impaired entrainment by light, the primary circadian entrainment cue. Those with conditions affecting vision, such as macular degeneration and cataracts, are 30–60% more likely to suffer from sleep deficiency. 5 Napping Napping is prevalent in aging populations, ranging from 25–46% in landmark studies of persons aged 65 years and older. 25 , 26 Napping has been associated with adverse outcomes, including cardiovascular disease, dementia, depression, diabetes, falls, impaired quality of life, and mortality. 27 However, other studies have suggested potential benefits for napping with respect to reduced cardiovascular risk and improved cognitive performance and well-being. 28 , 29 In particular, a recent study found that subjects who napped one to two times per week had lower risk of incident cardiovascular events, while no association was found with incidence of cardiovascular disease for more frequent napping or for daily nap duration (i.e., durations &lt;1 hour vs. ≥1 hour as compared to no napping). 29 This study shows the importance of accounting for nap frequency when assessing the effect of naps on cardiovascular health. Similarly, a study among persons aged 75 to 94 years found that daytime naps were protective for mortality if nighttime sleep durations were short (&lt;7 hours), but increased mortality risk if nighttime sleep durations were long (&gt;9 hours). 30 Whether napping is helpful or harmful probably has to do with the nap characteristics (i.e., frequency, duration) and total overnight sleep duration. Other characteristics, including nap timing and whether napping is habitual or intentional may also be important. 27 , 29 , 31 2. Risk Factors for Sleep Deficiency in Older Adults Comorbidities: Aging is commonly associated with multiple factors that can affect sleep, ranging from an increasing prevalence of health-related factors (e.g., chronic medical and psychiatric conditions, including primary sleep disorders) and psychosocial/behavioral factors. With a rising number of health problems, the likelihood of sleep disturbance increases, 32 in part because these health problems are associated with symptoms (e.g., pain, dyspnea) and/or medication effects that may disrupt sleep. 5 Notably, 75% of adults over 65 suffer, at a minimum, from at least 2 chronic health conditions. 33 Chronic pain is one of the most common conditions to cause disturbed sleep in older and has been associated with greater sleep latency and reduced sleep efficiency. Osteoarthritis is a major underlying cause of chronic pain. Other medical comorbidities associated with sleep deficiency are cancer, heart disease, stroke, respiratory and neurologic diseases. 33 , 34 Specific sleep disorders are important to consider as risk factors for sleep deficiency, as nearly all of them increase in prevalence with age. Among older adults, restless legs syndrome and periodic limb movements (PLMs) during sleep are present in 12% and 45% respectively, 29% have insomnia, and 24% have obstructive sleep apnea (OSA). 35 OSA requires special mention, as its presentation may differ in older adults. With aging, structural changes to the airway (e.g., loss of tissue elasticity and muscle wasting, fat deposits in the pharyngeal walls) are a more significant contributor than obesity to OSA, and older adults with OSA are more likely to present with nocturia and daytime sleepiness than snoring and witnessed apneas. 35 Circadian rhythm disorders, while rare overall, increase in prevalence with age and may contribute to sleep deficiency. Advanced sleep wake phase disorder (ASWPD) is an advance to an earlier time of the major sleep period. As opposed to an advanced sleep phase, ASWPD additionally includes a complaint of difficulty staying awake until a desired bedtime and/or an inability to remain asleep until the desired wake time as a result of the advanced sleep phase. 36 Sleepiness in the early evening may impede participation in valued activities. 37 The prevalence of ASWPD in the general population is unknown, but may be present in 1% of individuals aged 40–64 years. 36 Irregular sleep wake rhythm disorder (ISWRD) causes multiple irregular sleep and wake episodes throughout a 24-hour period due to the absence of a well-defined circadian sleep-wake cycle. 36 Individuals may have insomnia symptoms during the scheduled sleep period and/or daytime sleepiness during periods in which wake is desired. Those affected by ISWRD are usually institutionalized older adults with dementia or those with moderate to severe cognitive defects. 38 , 39 The overall prevalence of this disorder is unknown, but its prevalence increases with age, neurologic disease, mental disability, and dementia. 40 Medication and Substance Use: With greater incidence of medical conditions comes greater use of medications in the older adult, which can have profound implications for sleep. In a survey of Medicare beneficiaries, 46% experienced “polypharmacy”, defined as taking five or more medications. 41 Sedating drugs (e.g., antihistamines, anticholinergics, antiepileptics, opiates) may cause depressed respiration and daytime drowsiness, whereas activating drugs (e.g., stimulants, certain antidepressants, corticosteroids) may negatively impact the ability to initiate or maintain sleep. 5 Still others may cause sleep-disruptive symptoms (e.g., diuretics, hypoglycemic agents). 5 Moreover, drugs affecting the central nervous system can reduce slow wave and REM sleep and exacerbate sleep disorders. 4 Non-prescription drugs are equally significant, diphenhydramine or pseudoephedrine are commonly used medications that may disturb sleep-wake patterns. 5 Substance use, particularly caffeine, nicotine, and alcohol, may also negatively impact sleep. The stimulating effects of caffeine can increase sleep latency and arousals, leading to shorter sleep durations. 42 Smoking has been correlated with difficulty initiating sleep, maintaining sleep, and waking up, as well as sleep durations of less than 6 hours per night, with nicotine serving as the potential mediator of this effect. 34 Alcohol can worsen sleep disordered breathing by relaxing pharyngeal muscles and has been shown to promote sleep disturbance and arousals, leading to reduced sleep durations. 42 Nocturia: Nocturia, resulting from multifactorial etiologies, is another major contributor to impairments in sleep duration and quality in older adults. Older adults naturally produce less antidiuretic hormone and have less bladder capacity. 43 Men also commonly suffer from benign prostatic hyperplasia which may cause urgency, while post-menopausal women may suffer from a lack of the protective effects of estrogen on nocturia. 44 , 45 However, a crucially important cause, which should not be overlooked, is the role of obstructive sleep apnea. Hypoxemia, resulting from collapse of the airway, causes diaphragmatic contractions that lead to pressure changes in the thorax. When this leads to cardiac venous distension that impacts normal flow, the heart receives an incorrect signal of fluid overload and atrial natriuretic peptide is excreted, causing increased urine production. 45 Anyone experiencing nocturia at least 3 times nightly should be referred for polysomnography, as this is suggestive of OSA. 44 Psychosocial/Behavioral Factors: A constellation of psychosocial and behavioral factors, exerting effects through multiple pathways, may predispose to or precipitate sleep deficiency in older adults. Particularly relevant are the effects of social isolation, loneliness, loss of physical function, caregiving, and bereavement, which may contribute to sleep deficiency via effects on sleep hygiene, exposure to zeitgebers (cues from the environment [e.g., light, exercise, meals, social activity] that entrain circadian rhythms, promoting normal sleep-wake habits), 46 and/or increased risk of psychiatric comorbidity. Social isolation (having few social relationships or infrequent social contact) and loneliness (a subjective feeling of being isolated) are prevalent in older populations. 47 , 48 Because of retirement and living alone, nearly a third of older adults may be socially isolated. 49 Isolation and loneliness can impact sleep through effects on sleep hygiene, promoting behaviors that are counter to the promotion of healthy sleep, such as napping and irregular bedtimes. In addition, isolation and loneliness may be associated with decreased exposure to zeitgebers. 46 A prospective cohort study of persons ≥60 years found that a poor social network led to a greater risk of both short sleep (&lt;6 hrs) and poor sleep quality. 50 A 2020 study found an intriguing relationship between social support and the impact of rumination (intrusive thoughts) on sleep quality. Specifically, perceived support from a spouse, but not from family or friends, while not reducing rumination, did appear to reduce its harmful impact on sleep quality. Researchers speculated that spousal support may be more relevant to sleep because of access to such support at bedtime. 51 A variety of studies have linked both social isolation and loneliness with poorer sleep quality, while close relationships have been shown to improve self-reported (Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index) and objective (actigraphy) measures of sleep quality. 50 Loss of physical function is also common among older adults and may decrease physical activity and exposure to zeitgebers. 52 Older adults with decreased physical function (defined as difficulty walking one-half mile without help and/or difficulty walking a flight of stairs without help) are more likely to report symptoms of sleep deficiency. 32 Up to 20% of all caregivers in the United States are 65 years of age or older, 53 and may be subject to tremendous physical, emotional and financial strains, including middle-of-the-night sleep disruptions due to the needs of the care recipient. 4 Avoidant coping styles, which are characterized by attempts to suppress, rather than accept, unwanted or intrusive thoughts (e.g., use of distraction or denial), have been linked to poor sleep efficiency in caregivers for persons with dementia. 54 Bereavement, or suffering from the loss of a loved one to death, 55 may be experienced by as many as 70% of older adults. 56 This condition may contribute to sleep deficiency through worsening health and functional impairment, 57 increased risk for mood disorders, 55 as well as increasing loneliness and social isolation. 57 3. Consequences of Sleep Deficiency in Older Adults Mortality Robust evidence links measures of sleep deficiency, including sleep duration, quality, and timing, with mortality. A well-known U-shaped association has been described for the relationship of sleep duration with mortality. Both short and long self-reported sleep have been associated with mortality. 10 , 58 – 60 Similar results have been demonstrated for actigraphy-measured sleep duration and mortality. 10 It should be noted that these associations are derived mainly from cross-sectional studies, precluding causal inference. The relationship between short or long sleep duration and mortality is likely driven more by the underlying comorbidity causing alterations in sleep duration than by sleep duration per se . 10 The relationship between poor sleep quality and mortality may vary depending on the method used to define the former. A recently published meta-analysis found that subjective poor sleep quality was not associated with increased risk of death. This meta-analysis included studies with a wide range of sleep quality measures (e.g., disturbed or restless sleep, subjective poor sleep quality, subjective sleep problems, sleep difficulties, difficulty maintaining sleep). 60 When using objective measures of sleep quality, investigators from the Osteoporotic Fractures in Men (MrOS) Sleep study found objective sleep quality/sleep continuity as measured by actigraphy minutes awake after sleep onset to be one of the strongest predictors of mortality. 61 This relationship was maintained even after controlling for a host of serious diseases. Only age, cognition, and history of cardiovascular disease had a greater impact on mortality than sleep continuity. The effect of sleep timing on mortality has been evaluated by studies that examine the rhythmicity, stability and/or regularity of the sleep period from day to day. In the aforementioned study from the MrOS sleep cohort, older men with less robust rest-activity rhythms had higher all-cause and cardiovascular-related mortality rates. 62 Similar findings were shown in the Study of Osteoporotic Fractures (SOF) among older women, where weaker circadian activity rhythms were associated with higher mortality risk. In a separate analysis of the MrOS cohort, lower rhythmicity, as represented by the pseudo-F statistic from actigraphy, was one of the strongest sleep characteristics to predict mortality. In fact, lower rhythmicity ranked higher in importance than sleep continuity in predicting mortality. 61 Other studies examining the prospective association between fragmented circadian activity rhythms (as measured by actigraphy) and mortality found that older adults with less stable activity rhythms had a 20% increase in all-cause mortality. 63 Thus, whatever the pattern of bed time or wake time was, the “interday stability” (a measure of the similarity of the sleep-wake rhythm across several days) was protective, whereas “intraday variability”, which measured the frequency of variation between rest and activity over a 24-hour period, imposed a significantly higher mortality risk. 63 Cognition As with mortality, robust evidence links measures of sleep duration, quality, and timing, with cognition. Both shorter and longer sleep durations have been associated with cognitive impairment. A recent analysis of 7,959 participants in the Whitehall II study, who were followed for 25 years to assess incident dementia, found an increased risk for dementia among participants with short (≤6 hours) compared to normal (7 hours) sleep duration, even after adjusting for sociodemographic, behavioral, cardiometabolic, and mental health factors. 64 Similarly, in a prospective analysis from the Nurses’ Health study, shorter and longer sleep durations in both midlife and old age were associated with worse cognition later in life. 65 Several large surveys of older adults found that both short and long sleep duration were associated with poorer cognitive function in areas such as verbal fluency and recall, but that long sleep duration was more deleterious. 66 Several studies have also compared the effects of experimental sleep deprivation on older adults as compared to younger adults, finding that older adults exhibit greater decrements in tasks such as vigilance, reaction times, addition, and object use. 66 Acute sleep deprivation has also been shown to increase accumulation of β-amyloid in the hippocampus, suggesting a link between insufficient sleep duration and Alzheimer’s disease. 67 Various markers of poor sleep quality have been associated with adverse cognitive outcomes. In the MrOS study, reduced sleep efficiency, greater nighttime wakefulness, and poor self-reported sleep quality were associated with subsequent cognitive decline in community-dwelling older men. 68 In the Study of the National Social Life, Health, and Aging Project (NSHAP), a nationally representative cohort of older US adults, actigraphic sleep disruption measures (e.g., wake after sleep onset, fragmentation) were associated with 5-year cognitive decline. Wake after sleep onset had the strongest association with cognitive decline, while self-reported sleep-disruption measures showed little association with cognitive function. 69 With respect to sleep timing, analyses of actigraphy data from the MrOS cohort found that parameters of disrupted rest-activity rhythms (e.g., lower amplitude, pseudo F-statistic [overall circadian rhythmicity], phase-advanced acrophase [time of peak activity level]) were associated with cognitive decline. 70 Similarly, in the Study of Osteoporotic Fractures (SOF), older women with decreased circadian activity rhythm amplitude and robustness had increased odds of developing mild cognitive impairment (i.e., memory loss with maintenance of the ability to independently perform most activities of daily living) and dementia. 71 In contrast to the findings for mortality mentioned above, there was no relationship between other parameters representing rest-activity rhythm disruption (e.g., intradaily variability, interdaily stability) and dementia risk in the SOF cohort. 72 When discussing the relationship between sleep deficiency and cognition/dementia, it is important to acknowledge their bidirectional relationship. While sleep deficiency can affect cognition, so too can dementia itself produce changes in sleep. Persons with Alzheimer’s disease (AD) experience neurodegeneration and structural changes to the brain that may contribute to sleep deficiency. For example, persons with AD have fewer posterior NREM fast spindles compared with healthy older adults, and the severity of the discrepancy is predictive of the degree of memory impairment. 73 Neurofibrillary tangles in the preoptic area of the hypothalamus are also correlated with the degree of fragmented sleep. Amyloid β accumulation is associated with reduced REM sleep in both healthy adults and those with AD. Tau-associated neurofibrillary tangles within the medial-temporal lobe are a hallmark of AD, and tau levels in cerebrospinal fluid have been associated with diminished slow wave sleep in persons diagnosed with AD. Tau deposition in other areas of the brain has been found in cognitively normal older adults, which has led to interest as to whether these abnormalities could lead to sleep changes predictive of the onset of neurodegenerative disease. If so, the potential exists for patterns of sleep disturbance to be used as a diagnostic tool. 11 Interestingly, OSA also appears to have a bidirectional relationship with dementia. Patients with OSA have an 85% increased risk of developing mild cognitive impairment, while AD patients are more prone to develop OSA. Alzheimer’s disease is believed to damage neurons responsible for upper airway tone. 74 OSA patients have been found to develop more AD biomarkers, including amyloid β plaques or tau proteins, than those without the condition. 75 Depression Many studies demonstrate a connection between impairments in sleep duration, quality, and/or timing and mental health. While the relationship between sleep and mental health has been studied widely, most studies focus on depression and no meta-analyses of the relationship between psychiatric disease (e.g., depression, anxiety, or other disorders) have been performed. Short self-reported sleep duration (most often defined at ≤6 hours) has been associated in cross-sectional and longitudinal studies with depressive symptoms and diagnosis. 76 Some studies also support an increased risk for depression with long sleep duration (i.e., longer than 8–9 hours). 76 A study of Parkinson’s disease (PD) patients found that self-reported short sleep duration was highly correlated with depression severity, an effect that while significant in controls, was even greater in PD sufferers. The effect may be more pronounced in PD patients as a consequence of dopaminergic dysfunction that would inhibit such patients’ ability to increase dopamine production following sleep loss. 77 The link between poor sleep quality and depression is well-established and has additional implications for older adults due to the interconnectedness of sleep deficiency, depression and cognitive impairment. 74 , 78 The IMPACT study of older adults revealed that 44% of patients with persistent insomnia symptoms continue to suffer with depression 6 months later, while that was true for only 16% of participants not suffering insomnia symptoms. 79 Moreover, in assessing depression risk, sleep disturbance has been shown to have a 2.6 higher odds ratio than prior depression or disability. 80 Depression is a particular concern in older adults as a risk factor for cognitive impairment, with a recent study demonstrating that reported difficulty in initiating sleep entirely mediated the harmful effects of depression on cognitive impairment. 78 Parameters of disrupted rest-activity rhythms have also been linked with depression. In the SOF cohort of older women, depressive symptoms were associated with greater desynchronization of circadian activity rhythms, manifested by decreased amplitude, rhythm robustness, and mesor. 81 Similarly, a study from the Rotterdam cohort found that depressive symptoms were related to less stable and more fragmented rest-activity rhythms. 82 Finally, a recent study in older adults looked at the sleep regularity index from actigraphy, which captures rapid changes in sleep timing by calculating the percent probability of a person being asleep at any two time points 24 hours apart. 83 In this study, sleep irregularity was associated with an increased risk of depression. Physical Function Sleep duration, quality, and timing have been linked to impairments in physical function among older adults. An analysis of 6020 adults aged 65 and older participating in the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey between the years of 2007–2016 looked at the effect of sleep duration on “functional limitations” (i.e., reporting at least some difficulty in performing a basic task of daily living). Those achieving 7–8 hours of sleep per weeknight had a reduced likelihood of functional limitations, while the extremes of inappropriate sleep duration increased the odds of reporting functional limitations. Reporting &gt;9 hours of sleep had the most profound impact, demonstrating a nearly threefold greater odds of functional limitations. 84 Elderly women sleeping &lt;5 hours per night had 1.5 times the odds of having two or more falls in the next year when compared to older women who slept the recommended 7–8 hours. 85 Self-reported long sleep duration was also associated with an increased incidence of falls. 86 With respect to poor sleep quality, a study of 215 older adults found that poor sleep quality (&gt;5 on PSQI) conferred two times the odds of physical disability, defined as difficulty in performing activities necessary for living. This relationship remained even after controlling for known risk factors. 87 Actigraphy-measured parameters of sleep fragmentation have also been linked to fall risk in a study of older men. Sleep efficiency &lt;70% increased the odds of falling by 36%. 86 In older women, greater wake after sleep onset and lower sleep efficiency increased the risk for functional or physical decline. 88 Evidence in the domain of sleep timing and its relationship to physical function comes again from the MrOS cohort, where later acrophase was associated with an increase in risk of falls, but not fractures. 89 Additional support comes from a cross-sectional study of heart failure patients, which evaluated circadian rhythm robustness by calculating circadian quotient. 90 The circadian quotient provides a normalized amplitude compared to mesor (individual average activity level), accounting for daytime and nighttime activity and allowing comparison between participants with different activity levels. The results demonstrated that persons with higher circadian quotients (i.e., more robust rhythms) had better functional performance, as assessed by a six-minute walk test and the Medical Outcomes Study short form physical function scale. 91 4. Treatment of Sleep Deficiency in Older Adults Nonpharmacologic Interventions Common pharmacologic treatments for sleep deficiency may be associated with increased risk of adverse outcomes and/or be potentially inappropriate for use in the elderly. 92 , 93 Due to the loss of lean muscle mass and increase in body fat, the drug elimination half-life in the elderly is increased. Medications that effect the central nervous system, such as benzodiazepines (BZD), non-benzodiazepine receptor-agonists (BZRAs), and some antidepressants, are known to increase the risk of falls, hospitalizations, and even death, as well as disrupt sleep architecture. 4 , 92 BZDs have well documented harms in the elderly including dizziness, daytime drowsiness, cognitive impairment, and delirium. 94 Furthermore, BZDs are associated with falls, hip fractures, and car accidents. Moreover, their benefits are minimal, tolerance develops with repeated use, and rebound insomnia can occur after just 1 or 2 weeks of taking them. While some BZRAs can be used short term at low doses in the elderly with fewer side effects, in general, their benefits may not justify their risks. Therefore, the 2019 American Geriatrics Society Beers Criteria strongly advises against the use of both BZDs and BZRAs. 93 Moreover, behavioral interventions have demonstrated benefits without the adverse effects of pharmacologic interventions. Light Exposure: While some studies have not found a change in melatonin secretion with age, a study of elderly with insomnia symptoms in Japan found that it is possible to increase melatonin levels via exposure to light. Among a group of older Japanese, those with insomnia symptoms who were also significantly deficient in environmental light exposure were exposed to 4 hours of midday bright light for a period of 2 weeks. Not only were they able to increase their levels to those seen in a control group of young adults without circadian phase shifting, but there was a parallel in the magnitude of increase in melatonin secretion and improvements in sleep disturbance. 95 Bright light therapy is also useful specifically for disorders of sleep timing. 96 In these situations, bright light may be used to bring about more consolidated sleep (as with ISWRD) or to delay the major sleep period (as with ASWPD). 97 Physical and Social Activity: Physical and social activity have been linked to improved biomarkers of sleep, including a more robust lowering of body temperature and a greater proportion of N3 . 98 The relationship between sleep and physical activity is bidirectional, so while poorer quality and less sleep predict less physical activity, physical activity also has been shown to promote better sleep. 99 Aerobically fit people over 60 have shorter sleep onset latency, less WASO, and greater sleep efficiency. 100 A number of studies have found powerful benefits to sleep from exercise. Moderate intensity exercise has been shown to improve objective sleep quality and 3 months of aerobic training was shown to reduce fragmentation of the rest-activity rhythm in post-menopausal women. 100 A randomized controlled trial of aquatic exercise among older adults with mild sleep disturbance found significant improvements in sleep onset latency and sleep efficiency for persons in the intervention when compared to the control group. 43 One simple mechanism by which exercise is proposed to promote sleep is that it will deplete glycogen stores, thereby provoking an increase in adenosine, which triggers sleep. 101 This may be particularly important in older adults because of the observed loss of adenosine A1 receptors in older brains, a reduction which remains notable even after accounting for reduced brain cells and volume. This may render the elderly brain less sensitive to extracellular adenosine, requiring more to achieve adequate homeostatic sleep drive. 11 Two more recent studies demonstrated a synergistic reduction in risk of insomnia symptoms from the combination of social and physical activity. The first, which examined data from 7,162 community-dwelling older adults, and which controlled for health status, found that participants who reported having engaged in walking in the last month were 30% less likely to report insomnia symptoms, those that participated in an organized activity other than religious services in the last month were 22% less likely, and those who participated in both organized social events and walking were 40% less likely to experience insomnia symptomatology. 102 A follow up prospective study that tracked participants 65 years and older for 3 years found that lowest risk for insomnia symptoms was found in those who engaged in organized social activity as well as vigorous exercise (versus walking alone). 103 Behavioral Treatment for Insomnia: Cognitive behavioral treatment for insomnia (CBT-I) is highly efficacious in the short- and long-term. 104 Moreover, a 2019 study demonstrated that the therapy had multiple benefits, significantly reducing depression, maladaptive thinking, and hyperarousal in post-menopausal women, a population with increased risk of depression. The effect was measurable immediately following treatment as well as at 6 months. 105 Given the compounding and mediating relationships of insomnia, depression, and cognitive decline, this therapy is attractive when feasible. However, its implementation imposes a burden from the standpoint of availability, cost and time; it requires 6–8 individual treatment sessions with a trained clinician. 104 A brief behavioral intervention (BBTI), by contrast, may be carried out by any allied health professional and may require fewer sessions. 106 Rather than using a cognitive behavioral approach, BBTI teaches participants about sleep hygiene and circadian mechanisms, explaining the “why” behind the 4 behaviors emphasized: reducing time in bed, getting up at the same time each day, not going to bed unless sleepy, and not staying in bed unless asleep. BBTI was demonstrated to be an effective, simple, and long-lasting non-pharmacologic intervention for the treatment of insomnia in older adults. 106 Sleep Restriction Therapy (SRT) is a key component of CBT-I and BBTI but is also effective on its own as treatment. In particular, studies have demonstrated that it helps reduce sleep latency, WASO, and sleep efficiency. 94 In this technique, patients are instructed to be in bed attempting to sleep for a duration determined by calculating their average sleep duration over the course of a 2-week sleep diary. As sleep efficiency improves, patients will gradually increase their time in bed. 96 Music Therapy: A recent meta-analysis that evaluated the effect of music on sleep quality in older adults found that older persons who listened to music had significantly better quality sleep than those who did not. 107 Music therapy lasting greater than 4 weeks was most effective and “sedative” (slow tempo [60–80 beats per minute], soft volume, and smooth melody) music was more beneficial than “rhythmic” music (fast tempo, loud volume, and rhythmic patterns. Music is believed to improve sleep by reducing anxiety as a result of modulating the sympathetic nervous system response and reducing the release of cortisol. 107 Pharmacologic Treatments As noted above pharmacologic treatments for sleep deficiency in older adults have been associated with many adverse outcomes and should only be considered as a last resort when other interventions have failed. When behavioral changes are neither feasible nor sufficient to treat sleep deficiency, pharmacologic treatments, particularly with ramelteon, suvorexant or doxepin, may be considered. Ramelteon works by activating melatonin MT1 and MT2 receptors in the suprachiasmatic nucleus of the hypothalamus, decreasing the alerting signal and promoting sleep. It is preferred over benzodiazepines as it causes less sedation and has a better safety profile. It exhibits a higher binding affinity and longer half-life than exogenous melatonin, which may account for its increased hypnotic effects. 92 , 108 Suvorexant is as an orexin antagonist, blocking the wakefulness effects of orexin neurons by selectively inhibiting the binding of neuropeptides orexin A and B to OX1 and OX2 receptors. It has been shown to decrease sleep latency and increase mean sleep duration by 39 minutes, compared to 16 minutes with placebo. Its major side effect is daytime somnolence, but it hasn’t been shown to impair memory or balance the day after its use, nor has it been associated with withdrawal or rebound of symptoms upon discontinuation. 92 , 109 Doxepin at low doses (≤6 mg) represents another pharmacologic option for persons with difficulty maintaining sleep.92 While technically in the tricyclic antidepressant class, at doses below 10 mg this drug has mainly antihistaminergic effects. It is U.S. Food and Drug Administration approved for the treatment of insomnia and appropriate per the Beers criteria when used at doses of 3–6 mg.93 Caution is required when persons are taking other medications metabolized by the Cytochrome P450 enzyme pathways (e.g., proton pump inhibitors, cimetidine, amiodarone, bupropion, paroxetine), since concurrent use may lead to increased systemic concentrations of doxepin. 92 5. Limitations of Current Knowledge Major challenges in the study of sleep deficiency in older adults are the multifactorial nature of underlying etiologies and the lack of aging-specific tools for the assessment of sleep deficiency. Many of the traditional questionnaires commonly used to evaluate sleep complaints were developed in younger populations and tend to focus on one sleep complaint (e.g., insomnia or daytime sleepiness), 110 – 112 rather than taking a more comprehensive approach. Such an approach is needed in older adults, who may experience several sleep-related symptoms and multiple concurrent etiologies for sleep disruption. 5 In addition, atypical presentations of sleep disorders (e.g., nocturia from OSA) 35 and specific situational factors (e.g., greater flexibility in sleep-wake schedules, different expectations about health) 113 may decrease the sensitivity of traditional questionnaires to detect underlying sleep-wake disturbances. 113 , 114 On the other hand, objective, laboratory-based methods (e.g., polysomnography, serial measurement of melatonin levels) are burdensome and often not practical. 115 Thus, there is a need to develop age-appropriate self-reported and objective sleep assessment tools and/or biomarkers of sleep deficiency for effective evaluation of sleep disturbances in older adults. Such tools would also allow for rigorous and reproducible monitoring of sleep-promoting interventions. Conclusion The older adult simultaneously confronts multiple risk factors for sleep deficiency and suffers a great health burden and reduced quality of life consequent to its effects. Predisposing and precipitating factors are diverse and interconnected. These include aging-related alterations in sleep physiology, which predispose older adults to changes in sleep duration, quality, and timing. Though not necessarily specific to older adults, aging is associated with an increasing prevalence of diverse precipitants for sleep deficiency, including increasing rates of medical and psychiatric comorbidity, medication and substance use, and psychosocial/behavioral factors. Sleep deficiency in older adults leads to many adverse health outcomes, particularly with respect to mortality, cognition, depression, and physical function. In view of the disabling impact of sleep deficiency in the elderly, especially with respect to outcomes that impact the ability of older adults to live independently for as long as possible with good quality of life, it is incumbent upon healthcare providers to aggressively treat sleep deficiency and its root causes. Non-pharmacologic approaches, including light exposure, physical and social activity, BBTI, and music therapy, should be considered first line treatment due to their efficacy and safety profiles as compared to many of the traditional pharmacologic treatments. Additional research is needed to develop aging-specific self-reported and objective sleep measures and to identify biomarkers diagnostic of sleep deficiency. Key Points. With normal aging, there are changes to sleep architecture and circadian rhythmicity that contribute to sleep deficiency through their impact on sleep duration, quality, and timing. Causes of sleep deficiency in older age are multifactorial, including medical and psychiatric diseases, medication and substance use, social isolation, loneliness, loss of physical function, caregiving, and bereavement. Sleep deficiency has been associated in older adults with increased mortality, cognitive impairment, depression, and impaired physical function. Non-pharmacologic interventions are available for treatment of the older adult with sleep deficiency and are preferred to pharmacologic interventions due to the risk profile of the latter. Synopsis. With aging there are normative changes to sleep physiology and circadian rhythmicity that may predispose older adults to sleep deficiency, while many health-related and psychosocial/behavioral factors may precipitate sleep deficiency. In this chapter we describe age-related changes to sleep and how the health-related and psychosocial/behavioral factors typical of aging may converge in older adults to increase the risk for sleep deficiency. Next, we review the consequences of sleep deficiency in older adults, focusing specifically on important age-related outcomes, including mortality, cognition, depression, and physical function. Finally, we review treatments for sleep deficiency, highlighting safe and effective non-pharmacologic interventions.