Introduction Polycystic ovarian syndrome (PCOS) is documented as the leading endocrinological disorder affecting the reproductive aged women globally with overall prevalence between 6 and 20% [ 1 ]. International guidelines suggests three major highlighting features, i.e., hyperandrogenism (HA), oligo-anovulation (OA), and polycystic ovarian morphology (PCOM) [ 2 ] in defining the disease state. National Institute of Health (NIH) consensus panel 2012, proposed four different phenotypes of the disease based on the symptomatology. Phenotype A: includes OA, HA, and PCOM; phenotype B: OA and HA; phenotype C: HA and PCOM; and phenotype D: OA and PCOM [ 3 ]. The disease being heterogeneous in nature shows array of symptoms ranging from metabolic intolerance to poor obstetric outcomes such as infertility, miscarriages, gestational diabetes, and macrosomia [ 4 ]. Other associated symptoms include hirsutism, acne, androgenic alopecia, obesity, insulin resistance (IR), seborrhea, acanthosis nigricans cumulatively affecting the psychological well being as well [ 5 ]. PCOS women are more prone to develop cardiovascular disease (CVD), abdominal obesity, hypertension, type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM), dyslipidemia, and metabolic syndrome as secondary outcomes of the disease later on in their lives [ 6 ]. Besides presenting such enigmatic clinical manifestations, the etiology of this disease remains a matter of debate [ 7 ].In addition to genetic predisposition, environmental pollutants, lifestyle choices, diet have all been linked to PCOS pathogenesis [ 8 ]. One potentially important dietary factor studied is the junk food, which can be defined as readily available foods in the markets with high content of sugar, salt, saturated fats and trans fats, and low content of nutrients [ 9 ]. Such convenience-brought foods are often more appetizing and exceeds individuals daily energy requirements. Common junk foods include fast food, carbonated drinks, chips, desserts, chocolates, etc. [ 9 ]. Studies indicate that increased consumption of unhealthy diets, sugar-sweetened beverages, which often contain energy-dense sweeteners is linked to an increased risk of metabolic syndrome, central obesity, insulin resistance, and hypertension [ 10 ]. Consuming such energy-dense foods, high in sodium (processed meat), total fat (saturated and trans-fatty acids), and refined carbohydrates can result in postprandial metabolic disorders like dyslipidemia, subclinical inflammatory, and oxidative stress ultimately leading to dysregulated metabolic and hormonal rhythms [ 11 ]. Insulin resistance (IR) might empower the androgenic activity, which may further blunt IR through alteration of body composition, fueling this vicious cycle and exaggerating with the pathological state [ 12 ]. The already compromised metabolic and endocrine system of PCOS can become more vulnerable due to such dietary patterns, complicating the entire picture [ 13 – 15 ] Fig. 1 . Fig. 1. Illustration of how junk foods can trigger postprandial metabolic disorders like dyslipidemia, subclinical inflammation and oxidative stress ultimately leading to dysregulated metabolic and hormonal rhythms. Junk food requires less energy from the body to process because of the quantity of refined carbohydrates and partly hydrogenated oils it contains. In consequence, consuming a lot of junk food with a high glucose-salt fat composition encourages the body to store more fat. Extra fat buildup around abdominal organs favors IR. It also enhances the production of free fatty acids (FFAs) further aggravating the lipotoxicity, and the enhancement of IR. Adipocytes, generally alluded to as lipocytes or fat cells, produce a number of cytokines that trigger IR, which is associated with PCOS and other metabolic syndromes. Furthermore, it indirectly affects androgen levels through IR. Elevated insulin levels cause the decline of SHBG. The already compromised metabolic and endocrine system of PCOS can become more vulnerable due to such dietary patterns, complicating the entire picture. Abbreviations: Endocrine disrupting chemicals (EDC), Sex hormone binding globulin (SHBG), Insulin resistance (IR), Polycystic ovarian morphology (PCOM) Furthermore, junk foods can act as double edged sword for this disease as they can be the potential source for the endocrine disrupting chemicals (EDC’s) [ 16 , 17 ]. These chemicals are known to disrupt the normal ovarian environment leading to disrupted normal hormonal rhythms [ 17 , 18 ]. Different EDC’s like Bisphenol A (BPA), phthalates tend to leach out into ingestible products (food, water) leading to human exposure [ 19 – 21 ]. Studies have revealed that approximately 2–82 ng/g and 0.234 µg/L of BPA exposure is reported from metallic food cans and plastic bottles respectively [ 22 ]. Most of food packaging and serving materials are made of Polycarbonate (PC), polyvinylchloride (PVC) plastics and epoxy resins, serving as the primary source of EDC’s to human population [ 23 , 24 ]. Inaddition chemicals like mono-isobutyl phthalate, tributyltin and BPA are documented as obseogens [ 25 ] thus can alter the already entangled metabolic rhythms in PCOS patients promoting adipogenisis and hyperinsulinemia effecting its overall phenotype and disease severity. Considering the high prevalence of this disease in our Kashmiri population i.e., 35.3% [ 26 ], unraveling the role of out-door foods in shaping its phenotype is important to ascertain. Therefore, this study was taken up to investigate the role of junk foods in PCOS severity in our population. We correlated the dietary habits with different anthropometric and biochemical parameters to draw a conclusion whether these factors have any effect on disease phenotype. A total of 418 women suffering from menstrual and endocrionological implications were interviewed. Patients were recruited under the guidance of specialists and proper inclusion and exclusion criteria were taken into consideration (Table 1 ). The ethical clearance was sought from the Institutional Ethics Committee (IEC) Ref No. IEC-GMC-Sgr/T/03 (Date, 14/11/2020). Table 1. Depiction of inclusion and exclusion criteria for cases and controls Inclusion criteria Exclusion criteria Cases Patients fulfilling the Rotterdam criteria (menstrual dysregulation, hyperandrogenism, and polycystic ovaries) Patients with underlying conditions like adrenal hyperplasia, thyroid dysfunction, T2DM, hyperprolactinemia, auto immune disease Belonging to Jammu and Kashmir (J&amp;K) region Patients taking therapies like oral contraceptives, insulin sensitizing drugs, hypolipemic therapy, glucocorticoid Patients who don’t agree to participate Patients with ethnicity other than J&amp;K Controls Belonging to similar age group as that of cases Women with history of hormonal, menstrual irregularities, T2DM or thyroid dysfunction Belonging to Jammu and Kashmir (J&amp;K) region Women who don’t agree to participate Women with ethnicity other than J&amp;K Study Population We recruited a total of 418 women and age matched 126 control group. Control group constituted women with no history of hormonal or menstrual irregularities. They participated in the study voluntarily and were ethnically similar to the local population. Prior to investigation, both the patient and the control group were informed about the study.Those women who were reluctant to participate were not called for future examination. 404 PCOS women and 126 controls were finally enrolled in the study after thorough screening by the specialists, and all were required to sign informed consent forms. Women suffering from any underlying conditions like adrenal hyperplasia, thyroid dysfunction, T2DM, hyperprolactinemia or any other auto immune disease were excluded from the study. In addition, subjects getting any therapy like oral contraceptives, insulin sensitizing drugs, hypolipemic therapy, glucocorticoid therapy or any diet related therapy to reduce obesity were also excluded. Method The clinical diagnosis was done according to the Rotterdam Criteria with two out of three classical symptoms i.e., menstrual dysregulation, hyperandrogenism, and polycystic ovary morphology necessary to for the confirmation of the disease [ 27 ]. Furthermore, the patients were categorized into basic four phenotypes (A, B, C and D) as prescribed by NIH (2012). Health related survey was conducted by preparing a self-structured questionnaire as modified from Kulkarni et al. and Bohara et al. [ 28 , 29 ]. A detailed account on the type and frequency of outdoor foods eaten was specifically focused. Health related questions mainly included hirsutism, acne, menstrual irregularities, obesity, and family history regarding infertility, hair growth and diabetes. Anthropometric measurements like body weight, height, waist and hip size, Body mass index (BMI), systolic and diastolic blood pressure (SBP, DBP) measurements were taken. The degree of hirsutism was assessed using Ferriman-Gallwey scale (FG scale), on which score &gt; 8 was considered as significant [ 30 ]. Similarly, for acne vulgaris and grade III and above along with the degree of alopecia was considered as the significant feature for HA. For ascertaining the menstrual pattern irregularities four categories were made, those with regular periods, &lt; 35 days period interval no oligomenorrhea group, those with period interval &lt; 35–60 days, mild oligomenorrhea group, those with period interval &lt; 60 and 180 days, marked oligomenorrhea group and lastly those who menstruate only twice or fewer times per year were taken as amenorrhea group (Table 2 ). The transvaginal ultrasound (USG) was done to assess the ovarian morphology (follicular count, peripheral cyst and ovarian volume). To assess the prevalence of obesity and metabolic syndrome in our population, modified guidelines for obesity (on BMI) and metabolic syndrome (NCEP, ATP III criteria) for Asian Indians were followed [ 31 ]. For the biochemical investigations the blood samples were drawn on the 2nd day of cycle to perform different hormone assays (serum total T4, total testosterone, 17-OHP, cortisol, thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH), prolactin, luteinizing hormone (LH), and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH). Blood sugar level fasting (BSF), insulin levels cholesterol, triglycerides (TG), low-density lipoproteins (LDL) and high-density lipoproteins (HDL) were estimated on the same day. Chemiluminescent automated immunoanalyser (Siemens, USA) was employed to conduct the biochemical investigations.All biochemical investigations were carried under the proper guidance of hospital lab technicians. Commercial kits were used to measure fasting insulin and SHBG levels (Izotop, Budapest, Hungary). We aimed at obtaining information on some dietary habits of participants via questionnaire, modified from Bohara et al. [ 28 ]. Food and drink items mainly included biscuits, chips, chocolates, noodles, bread, burgers, pizza, processed meat, chicken, chow mien, Mo: Mo, samosa, fries, ice cream, sweets, confectionery soft drinks and sweetened drinks. The frequency of consuming each food item was done as, voracious eaters (&gt; 5 times/week), moderately eaters (2–4 times/week), rarely eaters. Subjects and control groups were asked to score how frequently they consumed each food/drink item. Table 2. Depiction of menstrual pattern irregularities categories in PCOS women Menstrual pattern No oligomenorrhea Mild oligomenorrhea Marked oligomenorrhea Amenorrhea Period interval &lt; 35 days &lt; 35–60 days &lt; 60–180 days Twice or fewer times per year Statistical Analysis Prevalence of individual PCOS phenotypes was estimated as percentages. The statistical analysis was done using graph pad prism8 software and p &lt; 0.05 was considered significant. The multiple comparison was done using analysis of variance (Two way-ANOVA) employing Kruskal–Wallis method. Results Assessment of PCOS Traits Among the PCOS Phenotypes and Controls A total of 404 PCOS women and 126 control females were finally assessed. Overall69.6% and 30.2% PCOS women were from urban and rural areas respectively. Among controls 61.9% were from urban area and 38.9% were from rural area. Type II diabetes was present as the major family history complication among PCOS women (14.5%). The phenotypic classification was done as per Rotterdam criteria. Among the PCOS women, phenotype A was the most prevalent accounting 32.8% (n = 131) followed by B, 27.8% (n = 113), C, 21.6% (n = 88) and the least prevalent was phenotype D with 17.7% (n = 72) prevalence in our population Fig. 2 . Fig. 2. Prevalence of different Rotterdam PCOS phenotypes in Kashmiri population The clinical symptomotology for the different phenotypes revealed that the phenotype A represented more severe hallmark feature of the disease state with 85.7% of hirsutism, 69.8% of acne vulgaris, 46% of mild oligomennorhoea, 50% of marked oligomennorhoea and 4% of ammenorhoea compared to other phenotypes. Table 3 represents the detailed insights of various PCOS traits between different phenotypes and control population. No significant difference was found between the age among cases and controls. The hirsutism degree was calculated as per FG score and the results indicated that no significant differences between A, B and C phenotypes. However, we find the hirsutism degree significantly differs between hyperandrogenic and normoandrogenic phenotypes i.e., phenotypes A and D, B and D and C and D. Also, phenotype D and healthy controls does not show any difference in hirsutism degree. No significant difference was observed between weight of cases and controls. BMI of the controls was significantly lower compared to all phenotypes, however, no significant difference was achieved between the BMI of phenotypes. Waist-hip ratio (WHR) was significantly higher in phenotype A and C ascompared to controls. Furthermore, LH/FSH was also seen elevated in all phenotypes when compared to controls. Phenotype A, B and C significantly varies in the testosterone levels when compared to phenotype D and controls. Interestingly, BSF and TG levels were seen significantly high in phenotype A compared to all other phenotypes and controls. Cholesterol levels were significantly elevated in phenotype A and C when compared to controls. Also, significant difference was seen in the LDL levels between cases and control. Phenotype A and C groups significantly differ in HDL levels when compared to controls in our population. However, SBP and DBP do not show any significant difference between cases and controls population. Table 3. Comparison of biochemical and hormonal profiles between the different PCOS phenotypes and controls Variable Phenotype A: HA + OA + PCOM n = 131 Phenotype B: HA + OA n = 113 Phenotype C: HA + PCOM n = 88 Phenotype D: OA + PCOM n = 72 Controls n = 126 Age (years) 21.2 (2.6) 22.8 (2.7) 22.7 (3.04) 20.1 (4.4) 21 (2.4) Age of Menarche (years) 12.43 (1.76) 13.8 (1.9) 12.3 (1.9) 11.7 (1.3) 12.1 (1.3) FG-score 12.37 (3.9) 12.11 (2.1) 12.03 (2.4) 6.7 (1.65) c,f,h 4.9 (0.8) d,g,i Weight (kg) 65.1 (8.3) 61.7 (8.4) 63.14 (8.3) 60.25 (7.3) 59.7 (5.7) Waist Circumference (WC) (cm) 84.5 (3.9) 83.8 (4.4) 83.7 (4.1) 82.92 (3.3) 80.9 (2.2) d, g, i BMI (kg/ m 2 ) 27.02 (2.9) 25.8 (3.1) 26.32 (2.9) 25.4 (2.3) 24.14 (2.2) d,g,i,j LH:FSH 1.3 (0.48) 1.27 (0.3) 1.29 (0.3) 1.0 (0.2) 0.94 (0.2) d,g,i,j WHR 0.89 (0.1) 0.86 (0.1) 0.87 (0.09) 0.85 (0.09) 0.83 (0.05) d,i Testosterone (ng/dl) 55.04 (17.2) 50.9 (11.7) 52.39 (15.9) 34.36 (9.7) c, f,h 31.44 (6.7) d,g,i SHBG (nmol/L) 36.45 (14) 38.6 (13.7) 37.7 (15) 55.1 (9.2) c, f,h 62. (17.8) d,g,i BSF (mg/dl) 91.2 (6.7) 86.27 (3.7) a 87.3 (3.8) b 85.2 (3.9) c 84.21 (2.6) d Fasting Insulin (µIU/mL) 16.6 (5.4) 14.4 (2.3) 15.2 (4.7) 12.9 (4.9) 10.8 (2.5) d,g,i HOMA-IR 3.37 (1.17) 2.96 (1.2) 3.1 (1.14) 2.61 (1.1) 1.972 (0.95) d,i QUICKI 0.32 (0.03) 0.30 (0.05) 0.32 (0.04) 0.35 (0.04) 0.38 (0.05) Serum Total cholesterol (mg/dl) 165.28 (21) 159 (17) 163.7 (25) 155.4 (17.73) 152 (16.7) d,i Serum Triglycerides (mg/dl) 153.7 (24) 142.6 (22.1) a 144.4 (24.7) b 135.5 (21.3) c 127.5 (19.1) d LDL(mg/dl) 104 (16.1) 97.1 (13.1) 100.6 (15.6) 96.38 (15) 85.2 (8.4) d,g,i,j HDL(mg/dl) 45.2 (9.4) 47.78 (8.4) 46.8 (9.7) 478.2 (10.3) 54 (9.6) d,i SBP (mm Hg) 121 (4.1) 120.9 (3) 121 (2.7) 120.2 (3) 120 (2) DBP(mm Hg) 82.2 (5.7) 82.4 (2.8) 82.5 (5.2) 80.1 (3.4) 80.03 (2.5) Data are shown as mean (SD) Differences are tested by ANOVA (Kruskal–Wallis method) with correction for multiple comparisons a p &lt; 0.05 Phenotype A vs. Phenotype B b p &lt; 0.05 Phenotype A vs. Phenotype C c p &lt; 0.05 Phenotype A vs. Phenotype D d p &lt; 0.05 Phenotype A vs. Controls e p &lt; 0.05 Phenotype B vs. Phenotype C f p &lt; 0.05Phenotype B vs. Phenotype D g p &lt; 0.05 Phenotype B vs. Controls h p &lt; 0.05Phenotype C vs. Phenotype D i p &lt; 0.05Phenotype C vs. Controls j p &lt; 0.05Phenotype D vs. Controls Assessing the Impact of Junk Food on PCOS Traits Among the PCOS Phenotypes and Controls The impact of the junk food on the PCOS severity among different phenotypes and controls was achieved by dividing our population into three main diet groups; voracious eaters, moderately eaters and rarely eaters (Figs. 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 ). Majorly consumed food included packed food (78%), fast food (63%), beverages (66%) among cases and 72%, 66% and 68% for control population. Interestingly, it can be seen that an affluent consumption of the junk foods was related to the increased BMI in all phenotypes. Voracious eaters of phenotype A was seen to have highest BMI compared to other groups among (Fig. 3 a). Of note, FG score presented the more striking results. It can be seen the diet category had significantly direct affect on the degree of hirsutism between cases and controls among different phenotypes except for the non hyperandrogenic phenotype D (Figs. 3 b, 4 b, 5 b, 6 b). Importantly, a significant increase in the hirsutism among cases can be observed in phenotype A, concomitant with the increased consumption of junk food. Furthermore, in contrast to the control group, the WC in cases is higher across all phenotypes; nevertheless, there is no significant difference between the two groups when comparing the various dietary categories across all phenotypes (3c, 4c, 5c, and 5d). Taking into account the TG, HDL, BSF and hormonal profiles of cases and controls under different diet groups, a significantly increased trend in metabolic and hormonal parameters can be seen moving from rarely consumption group to voraciously consumption group in phenotype A (3d, 3e, 3f). Regarding TG, LH/FSH ratio, HDL levels, and testosterone levels across patients and controls between different diet groups, a similar pattern was noted for phenotypes B, C, and D (4d, 4e, 4f, 4g, 5d, 5e, 5f, 5g, 6d, 6e, 6f, and 6g). A significant increase can also be seen in the testosterone levels between the voracious eaters cases and rarely eater cases in phenotype A, further confirming the facts that junk foods might have an amplified effect on the hyperandrogenism (3g). Moreover, it can be observed that LH/FSH ration in the phenotype A showed markedly higher values than any other phenotype and a significant difference between cases can be seen indicating the role of diet in governing androgenic parameters (3f). Overall, we report that phenotype A showed more severe dietary related PCOS features when compared to any other phenotype (Fig. 3 ). Phenotype B showed higher values for TG when compared to phenotype C and D. Dietary habits can also been seen to significantly affect the TG values between cases and controls in all three phenotypes (3d, 4d, 5d, 6d). Again, in comparison to C and D phenotypes across all food groups, phenotype B has the lowest HDL levels (4e). Phenotype D showed significant difference in HDL values between voracious eater cases eater cases group. Fasting blood glucose levels were alleviated in phenotype C when compared to B and D phenotypes in all diet groups. A parallel increase can be witnessed in the fasting glucose levels with complex dietary habit but significant difference can be achieved in phenotype A (3h). Phenotype C showed the highest values for androgenic parameters, both LH/FSH and testosterone levels compared to B and D in all diet groups (5b, 5f, 5g). Fig. 3. The figure compares biochemical, anthropometric and hormonal profile of Phenotype A diet groups vs. control diet groups. Changes in BMI ( a ), degree of hirsutism (FG score) ( b ), waist circumference (WC) ( c ), triglycerides (TG) ( d ), high density lipoprotein (HDL) ( f ), LF FSH ratio ( g ), testosterone, blood sugar fasting (BSF) ( h ), concentrations according to dietary habit. Data shown as mean (SD) tested using analysis of variance (Two-way ANOVA). a p &lt; 0.05Cases:Voracious eaters vs. Cases:Moderately eaters, b p &lt; 0.05Cases:Voracious eaters vs. Cases:Rarely eaters, c p &lt; 0.05Cases:Voracious eaters vs. Controls:Voracious eaters, d p &lt; 0.05Cases:Voracious eaters vs. Controls:Moderately eaters, e p &lt; 0.05Cases:Voracious eaters vs. Controls:Rarely eaters, f p &lt; 0.05Cases:Moderately eaters vs. Cases:Rarely eaters, g p &lt; 0.05Cases:Moderately eaters vs. Controls:Voracious eaters, h p &lt; 0.05Cases:Moderately eaters vs. Controls:Moderately eaters, i p &lt; 0.05Cases:Moderately eaters vs. Controls:Rarely eaters, j p &lt; 0.05Cases:Rarely eaters vs. Controls:Voracious eaters, k p &lt; 0.05Cases:Rarely eaters vs. Controls:Moderately eaters, l p &lt; 0.05Cases:Rarely eaters vs. Controls:Rarely eaters, m p &lt; 0.05Controls:Voracious eaters vs. Controls:Moderately eaters, n p &lt; 0.05Controls:Voracious eaters vs. Controls:Rarely eaters, o p &lt; 0.05Controls:Moderately eaters vs. Controls:Rarely eaters Fig. 4. The figure compares biochemical, anthropometric and hormonal profile of Phenotype B diet groups vs. control diet groups. Changes in BMI ( a ), degree of hirsutism (FG score) ( b ), waist circumference (WC) ( c ), triglycerides (TG) ( d ), high density lipoprotein (HDL) ( e ), LF FSH ratio ( f ), testosterone ( g ), blood sugar fasting (BSF) ( h ), concentrations according to dietary habit. Data shown as mean (SD) tested using analysis of variance (Two-way ANOVA). a p &lt; 0.05Cases:Voracious eaters vs. Cases:Moderately eaters, b p &lt; 0.05Cases:Voracious eaters vs. Cases:Rarely eaters, c p &lt; 0.05Cases:Voracious eaters vs. Controls:Voracious eaters, d p &lt; 0.05Cases:Voracious eaters vs. Controls:Moderately eaters, e p &lt; 0.05Cases:Voracious eaters vs. Controls:Rarely eaters, f p &lt; 0.05Cases:Moderately eaters vs. Cases:Rarely eaters, g p &lt; 0.05Cases:Moderately eaters vs. Controls:Voracious eaters, h p &lt; 0.05Cases:Moderately eaters vs. Controls:Moderately eaters, i p &lt; 0.05Cases:Moderately eaters vs. Controls:Rarely eaters, j p &lt; 0.05Cases:Rarely eaters vs. Controls:Voracious eaters, k p &lt; 0.05Cases:Rarely eaters vs. Controls:Moderately eaters, l p &lt; 0.05Cases:Rarely eaters vs. Controls:Rarely eaters, m p &lt; 0.05Controls:Voracious eaters vs. Controls:Moderately eaters, n p &lt; 0.05Controls:Voracious eaters vs. Controls:Rarely eaters, o p &lt; 0.05Controls:Moderately eaters vs. Controls:Rarely eaters Fig. 5. The figure compares biochemical, anthropometric and hormonal profile of Phenotype C diet groups vs. control diet groups. Changes in BMI ( a ), degree of hirsutism (FG score) ( b ), waist circumference (WC) ( c ), triglycerides (TG) ( d ), high density lipoprotein (HDL) ( e ), LF FSH ratio ( f ), testosterone ( g ), blood sugar fasting (BSF) ( h ), concentrations according to dietary habit. Data shown as mean (SD) tested using analysis of variance (Two-way ANOVA). a p &lt; 0.05Cases:Voracious eaters vs. Cases:Moderately eaters, b p &lt; 0.05Cases:Voracious eaters vs. Cases:Rarely eaters, c p &lt; 0.05Cases:Voracious eaters vs. Controls:Voracious eaters, d p &lt; 0.05Cases:Voracious eaters vs. Controls:Moderately eaters, e p &lt; 0.05Cases:Voracious eaters vs. Controls:Rarely eaters, f p &lt; 0.05Cases:Moderately eaters vs. Cases:Rarely eaters, g p &lt; 0.05Cases:Moderately eaters vs. Controls:Voracious eaters, h p &lt; 0.05Cases:Moderately eaters vs. Controls:Moderately eaters, i p &lt; 0.05Cases:Moderately eaters vs. Controls:Rarely eaters, j p &lt; 0.05Cases:Rarely eaters vs. Controls:Voracious eaters, k p &lt; 0.05Cases:Rarely eaters vs. Controls:Moderately eaters, l p &lt; 0.05Cases:Rarely eaters vs. Controls:Rarely eaters, m p &lt; 0.05Controls:Voracious eaters vs. Controls:Moderately eaters, n p &lt; 0.05Controls:Voracious eaters vs. Controls:Rarely eaters, o p &lt; 0.05Controls:Moderately eaters vs. Controls:Rarely eaters Fig. 6. The figure compares biochemical, anthropometric and hormonal profile of Phenotype D diet groups vs. control diet groups. Changes in BMI ( a ), degree of hirsutism (FG score) ( b ), waist circumference (WC) ( c ), triglycerides (TG) ( d ), high density lipoprotein (HDL) ( e ), LF FSH ratio ( f ), testosterone ( g ), blood sugar fasting (BSF) ( h ), concentrations according to dietary habit. Data shown as mean (SD) tested using analysis of variance (Two-way ANOVA). a p &lt; 0.05Cases:Voracious eaters vs. Cases:Moderately eaters, b p &lt; 0.05Cases:Voracious eaters vs. Cases:Rarely eaters, c p &lt; 0.05Cases:Voracious eaters vs. Controls:Voracious eaters, d p &lt; 0.05Cases:Voracious eaters vs. Controls:Moderately eaters, e p &lt; 0.05Cases:Voracious eaters vs. Controls:Rarely eaters, f p &lt; 0.05Cases:Moderately eaters vs. Cases:Rarely eaters, g p &lt; 0.05Cases:Moderately eaters vs. Controls:Voracious eaters, h p &lt; 0.05Cases:Moderately eaters vs. Controls:Moderately eaters, i p &lt; 0.05Cases:Moderately eaters vs. Controls:Rarely eaters, j p &lt; 0.05Cases:Rarely eaters vs. Controls:Voracious eaters, k p &lt; 0.05Cases:Rarely eaters vs. Controls:Moderately eaters, l p &lt; 0.05Cases:Rarely eaters vs. Controls:Rarely eaters, m p &lt; 0.05Controls:Voracious eaters vs. Controls:Moderately eaters, n p &lt; 0.05Controls:Voracious eaters vs. Controls:Rarely eaters, o p &lt; 0.05Controls:Moderately eaters vs. Controls:Rarely eaters Prevalence of Obesity and Metabolic Syndrome in PCOS Phenotypes and Control Population in Relation to the Junk Food Consumption We assessed the prevalence of obesity and MS in cases and controls as per the modified guidelines for obesity and MSfor Asian Indians [ 31 ]. The results furnished that the overall prevalence of obesity in PCOS group was almost double than the control population i.e., 66.1% and 35.7% respectively. Also, the overall prevalence of MS in the cases was 46% and 11% in control population. We reported 73% phenotype A women were obese, 69% of women of phenotype C, 63.5% of women of phenotype B and 51.8% of phenotype D. MS also followed the same trend with highest prevalence reported in phenotype A (50.7%) followed by C (45.5%), B (44.8%) and D (40.9%). The overall picture of the obesity and MS status across all phenotypes and controls based on the frequency of junk food consumption is showed in Fig. 7 a–c. As the data suggests, the higher consumption of unhealthy food, higher are the adverse metabolic outcomes reported in PCOS women in our study group. Fig. 7. a : Prevalence of obesity and metabolic syndrome (MS) in different PCOS phenotypes and controls, b , c : Frequency of junk food consumption in different phenotypes and controls in relation to obesity and metabolic syndrome (MS) respectively Discussion Kashmiri population reported higher prevalence of PCOS (35%); underpinning its phenotypic status and secondary disease related outcomes is of paramount significance. The present study provides insights about the PCOS phenotypic classification and the disease severity outcome in ethnic Kashmiri population. Furthermore, we also tried to elucidate the effect of dietary habits on PCOS traits. Our study reported the greater predisposition of classical phenotype A (32.8%) compared to other Rotterdam phenotypes. Similar results have been furnished by the studies carried out in Canada [ 32 ], Italy [ 33 ], China [ 34 ], Iran [ 35 ], Turkey [ 36 ], Lebanon [ 37 ], Greek [ 38 ], Iraq [ 39 ] and Mexico [ 40 ]. In contrary we report least prevalence of phenotype D, studies conducted in Vietnam [ 41 ], China [ 42 ], Sudan [ 43 ], Iran [ 44 ] follow the same results. Few of the studies documented majority of PCOS women expressed phenotypes B and C while as; phenotype A and phenotype D were equally prevalent [ 45 , 46 ]. In India itself, a diversity of results with regard to the phenotypic prevalence in different regions have been reported. Study conducted by Sachdeva et al. [ 47 ] reported phenotype A as the most prevalent PCOS phenotype which is consistent with our study. Similar results were furnished by Khurana et al. [ 48 ]; Gupta et al. [ 49 ]; Tripathy et al. [ 50 ]; Parveen et al. [ 51 ]. On the contrary studies by Patel et al. [ 52 ]; Dadachanji et al. [ 53 ]; Joshi et al. [ 54 ] reported the high prevalence of phenotype D in Indian population. The variation in the above stated data can be attributed to the role of ethnicity, diet habits, and genetic factors that have been associated to impact its phenotypic expression [ 55 , 56 ]. Focusing on the disease severity status between different phenotypes and healthy controls, our findings strengths the facts that the PCOS women shows metabolic and hormonal dysregulations compared to healthy controls [ 43 ]. Comparing the Rotterdam phenotypes, phenotype A reported the full-blown symptoms of hirsutism, menstrual dysfunction and acne when compared to other phenotypes and controls. The results are in parallel with the studies conducted by Sachdeva et al. [ 47 ]. Furthermore, our study reported comparably higher FG score values as well as serum total testosterone levels in phenotype A and C than in B and D phenotypes and healthy controls. Interestingly, phenotypes A and C also presented significantly higher risks of cardiometabolic anomalies in terms of lower HDL levels, higher total cholesterol levels, WHR, BSF levels and I.R parameters (HOMA-IR and QUICKI) when compared to other Rotterdam phenotypes and controls. Similar findings are reported by the Shorff et al. [ 57 ]. However, results furnished by Sachdeva et al. reported elevated androgenic profiles in phenotype B compared to phenotype C in contrast with our findings. Comparing the overall metabolic, androgenic and hormonal aspects of normoandrogenic phenotype D, it presented milder symptoms compared to other phenotypes in our population. The results are in line with the studies conducted by Dadachanji et al. and Shorff et al. [ 53 , 57 ]. In addition, it can be noted that BMI values in all phenotypes were significantly higher compared to controls however; no significant difference was achieved between phenotypes, signifying that a variable risk of cardiometabolic and metabolic syndrome risk factors between the Rotterdam phenotypes, independent of BMI [ 58 ]. Our results designate significantly increased risk for impaired glucose tolerance, decreased insulin sensitivity and higher risk for impaired fasting glucose (IFG) in all PCOS women except for normoandrogenic phenotype, underlining the role of hyperandrogenism to be associated with the degree of IRin this population as corroborated in previous studies [ 59 ]. Insulin is well documented as cogonadotropin facilitating the production of excess androgens, downregulating the expression of SHBG thereby increasing the levels of serum androgens [ 60 ]. Thus, it can be inferred that IR and hyperandrodenism acts as “partners in crime” in entangling the overall picture of the disease state in hyperandrogenic phenotypes in our population.Compared to phenotype B, phenotype A and C had worse outcomes in terms of increased abdominal adiposity, pro-atherogenic dyslipidemia, aggravatedIR, abnormal gonadotropins, and hyperandrogenism; phenotype D appeared to be very similar to the control population. Obesity and MS have been seen to affect both reproductive and metabolic anomalies associated with PCOS. We tried to elucidate the prevalence of obesity and MS between different Rotterdam phenotypes and control population. The prevalence of obese PCOS women in our population (66%) was nearly twice that of the control group (35.7%).Similar findings are furnished by Dadachanji et al. [ 53 ]. Similarly, the prevalence of MS in our PCOS and control population was 46% and 11% respectively. Also the phenotype A women showed highest prevalence in obesity compared to B, C and D. Towards the MS, similar trend was followed with phenotype A topping the list with relation to the metabolic syndrome followed by C, B and D phenotypes. The results are in parallel with the study conducted by Daan et al. and Sachdeva et al. [ 47 , 61 ]. Additionally, we investigated the impact of diet, especially the frequency of outdoor foods, on the severity of PCOS.Junk food has been shown to have low levels of fiber, vitamins A and C, and calcium, but high levels of fat, saturated fat, energy density, fructose, and glycemic index. Its high portion sizes, macronutrient makeup, and frequent coupling with similarly big servings of soft beverages loaded with sugar all lead to overindulgence in calorie consumption [ 62 ].Our diet groups were designated as voracious eaters, moderately eaters and rarely eaters. We compared the metabolic, androgenic and hormonal profiles of different PCOS phenotypes and controls in relation to the frequency of diet they consumed. We reported the more inclination toward the consumption of junk food is associated with increased BMI values in cases and controls, voracious consumers of junk food for all phenotypes have significantly higher BMI values compared to control groups. The results are supported by the study carried out by Kulkarni et al. [ 29 ] depicting positive association between the BMI and diet composition. More striking features are presented by the androgenic parameters both FG score and testosterone. More the consumption of junk food, a proportionate increase in the hirsutism degree is witnessed between cases in the phenotype A. The results are in line with the study conducted by Kulkarni et al. [ 29 ]. Furthermore, LH/FSH ratio also witnessed significant increase in relation to the junk food consumption within cases and between cases and controls, pointing out to the fact that role of diet in governing the derangements of hormonal profiles in our population. It can be noted that increased consumption of the junk food is associated with the more unfavorable metabolic outcomes, and this effect is more severe in androgenic forms of PCOS in our population. Increased consumption of the junk food increases the level of free fatty acids in the blood stream. Elevated amounts of FFAs produced from adipocytes into the bloodstream cause IR in the liver and muscle, a condition referred to as “lipotoxicity” [ 63 ]. Adiponectin, a hormone generated from adipose tissue that raises insulin sensitivity is reduced leading to obesity and IR. Also, numerous cytokines, including IL-6, IL-1β, and tumor necrosis factor-α, are secreted by adipocytes and have been linked to the development of MS [ 64 ]. The outdoor meals are energy dense leading to obesity via number of mechanisms. Foods high in energy may interfere with body’s appetite control systems. Individuals typically consume a comparable amount of food each day, eating meals high in energy increases daily calorie consumption [ 65 ]. After consuming high-energy meals, people usually reduce their intake of food very once, but their compensatory intake is often inadequate, resulting in unintentional overconsumption leading to obesity. With increasing obesity, the insulin response ultimately attenuates, possibly contributing to glucose intolerance. Outdoor foods are also associated with the high glycemic burden (high refined carbohydrates and less fiber) triggering greater postprandial elevations in serum glucose ultimately leading to a commensurate insulin secretion by β-cells. The resultant high insulin to glucagon ratio augments energy storage through lipogenesis and glycogenesis. Studies have revealed that high glycemic index feeds accelerate fat deposition and lead to obesity in rats [ 66 ]. Of note junk food is typically low in fiber content which may be the contributing factor for obesity and MS. Studies have demonstrated that diet rich in fiber was associated with the decreased risk of T2DM and weight gain [ 67 ]. Likewise in another study done on Swedish population, low occurrence of MS traits, such as central obesity and hyperlipidemia, was linked to dietary patterns highlighted by high fiber consumption[ 68 ].Our results are supported by numerous studies, indicating the role of diet PCOS disease severity [ 12 , 13 , 29 ]. In addition, we noted that the prevalence of obesity and MS was highest among voracious eaters followed by moderately eaters and the least prevalence was found in rarely consumers of junk food in all Rotterdam phenotypes. Thus, it is imperative to delineate association of diet with the PCOS presentation. The association between PCOS and obesity is incontrovertible. It exaggerates with major pathways associated with the increased risk of impaired glucose tolerance, dyslipidemia, metabolic syndrome, and hyperandrogenemia by concurrently inhibiting hepatic SHBG synthesis. Our study tries to elucidate the phenotypic differences based on Rotterdam in our Kashmiri population and compare their biochemical and hormonal profiles. We found hyperandrogenic phenotypes were more vulnerable to the metabolic implications compared to normandrogenic phenotype. Our study emphasize that obesity may be linked to such metabolic vulnerability across phenotypes [ 60 ]. We reported more prevalence of obesity in hyperandogenic phenotypes indicating its role in accelerating disease outcomes. Furthermore, the spoliation is done by the consumption of junk food that exaggerates with the already impaired metabolic and hormonal rhythms in PCOS women. Unhealthy diet is reported to promote obesity, metabolic dysregulations and reproductive implications. In addition, junk foods are associated to be source of EDC’s that may also favor more disease vulnerability. EDC’s are known as obseogens, interfere with the steroidogenic pathway, downregulates the activity of hepatic uridine diphosphate glucuronosyltransferases (UGT) enzymes, metabolism and clearance of androgens [ 69 ], thus exacerbating this vicious cycle in PCOS women. The limitation in our study was that we take into account all junk foods as a whole, rather than categorizing into packed food, fast food, carbonated drinks, sweetened beverages that could have possibly added more soundness to our study. As covering, all types of food items and their possible consumption frequency by cases and controls might have resulted in biasness in our study. Conclusion The present study provides an opportunity to understand the complexity of PCOS by highlighting the hormonal and metabolic characteristics of each Rotterdam phenotype. We found phenotype A as the most severe phenotype in terms of metabolic and androgenic outcomes in our population from north India. The hyperandrongenic phenotypes were more prevalent with adverse in symptomatology compared to normandrogenic group. Understanding phenotypic status of the disease helps in formulating prompt management strategies to prevent detrimental reproductive and cardiometabolic sequelae. Also we noted that the dietary factor is associated with increased severity of PCOS, particularly with regard to hirsutism, IR. Therefore, while formulating an effective management strategy for this condition, thorough food and lifestyle evaluation should be emphasized.