Introduction Parkinson’s disease (PD) is a disabling disorder affecting over 11 million people globally for which no effective disease-modifying treatments exist. 1 , 2 Despite this urgent need for treatments, numerous trials of promising agents have failed in recent years. 3 , 4 The near-consensus among experts is that these trials failed in part because patients were recruited too late in the disease process. 3 , 4 PD develops insidiously over years, and extensive neuronal death has already occurred by the time the motor symptoms necessary for diagnosis become clinically detectable. 5 , 6 Developing strategies to identify individuals at earlier stages of the disease may therefore be crucial for increasing the effectiveness of treatments. Identifying individuals earlier during the disease process, when clinical features are present but insufficient to warrant a PD diagnosis, remains a considerable challenge. During this period, known as the prodromal phase, individuals often experience a range of non-motor signs and symptoms including autonomic, neuropsychiatric, sleep, and sensory disturbances. 7 , 8 Although these non-motor features occur more frequently in individuals with prodromal PD compared to the general population, individual features are often insufficient for early disease detection. 9 Strategies based on combinations of features 8 – 10 have shown promise for predicting clinically manifest PD, but only among high-risk populations (i.e., individuals with specific genetic traits or REM sleep behavior disorder [RBD]) that are not representative of most PD patients and required highly specialized assessments. 11 , 12 The performance of these strategies in a broader population, using low-cost, scalable assessments, remains unclear. 8 , 11 – 18 Longitudinal evaluations of the progression and heterogeneity of the prodromal phase are also lacking. Since 2012, we have carried out a comprehensive prospective assessment of prodromal PD features among 6,108 men participating in the well-established Health Professionals Follow-up Study (HPFS). 19 Here we demonstrate how combinations of key signs and symptoms, measured using low-cost assessments, can predict the progression to clinically manifest disease (i.e., phenoconversion) in a large population-based cohort. Moreover, using a data-driven approach, we provide an in-depth description of the progression and heterogeneity of the prodromal PD phase. Methods Study Population The HPFS has prospectively followed 51,529 US male health professionals since 1986 through biannual questionnaires. In 2012, we started a cohort study, nested within the HPFS, to investigate prodromal PD. The design of this prodromal PD cohort is summarized in Figure S1 , and described elsewhere. 20 Briefly, to reduce costs and improve the efficiency in identifying individuals in the prodromal PD phase, cohort participants were selected following a two-stage approach. First, in 2012, 18,304 active HPFS participants were screened for the presence of constipation and probable RBD (pRBD) via self-reports ( Table S1 ). Then, in 2014, all participants with either constipation or pRBD and a random sample of men without these features were sent a Brief Smell Identification Test (BSIT) 21 and a self-administered assessment of other key prodromal features ( Table S1 ). The 2014 assessment was completed by 6,474 men (73% of those who were sent assessments), constituting the prodromal cohort. These men were sent another prodromal assessment in 2017, and two HPFS follow-up questionnaires in 2016 and 2018. We excluded men with a PD diagnosis at return of the 2014 assessment (n=147), considered our baseline in phenoconversion analyses. We also excluded men who did not respond to any HPFS follow-up questionnaire (n=213) and those with missing data on Parkinsonism (n=6). This study was approved by the Human Research Committee at Mass General Brigham Health Care and Harvard T. H. Chan School of Public Health. All participants provided informed consent. Assessment of prodromal PD Information on motor and non-motor PD features has been collected in the HPFS prodromal PD cohort via self-administered assessments on three occasions (2012, 2014, and 2017; Table S1 ). In-person examinations were conducted by a movement disorders specialist in a subset of 51 participants to validate our parkinsonism screening questionnaire and color discrimination test (correlation coefficients ranged from 0.64 to 0.80, P&lt;0.001). 20 Most of the other features have been validated elsewhere or used in HPFS analyses ( Table S1 ). Information on PD risk factors including caffeine intake, cigarette smoking, physical activity, family history of PD, and diabetes has been collected repeatedly and validated in the HPFS. 22 – 25 We created two composite measures to identify men in the prodromal phase of PD. The first measure aligned with our study design and considered the presence of constipation and pRBD in the first stage of our selection strategy, and the presence of hyposmia in the second stage. We chose these three features because their ability to predict phenoconversion is supported by the strongest evidence. 7 Constipation was defined as reported bowel movement every other day or less frequently, or laxative use at least weekly. 20 , 26 pRBD was assessed using a question adapted from the Mayo Sleep Questionnaire that asks about dream enacting behavior during sleep, with a reported sensitivity of 100% and specificity of 95% against polysomnography-confirmed RBD. 27 Hyposmia was defined as a BSIT score in the bottom 10% of those without pRBD and constipation. 20 The second composite measure was based on the established MDS research criteria for prodromal PD, 8 and incorporated information on eight PD risk factors and seven prodromal markers of PD using a Bayesian approach ( Table S2 ). In this approach, the posterior probability of prodromal PD is calculated by multiplying the pretest odds, which depend on an individual’s age, by the product of likelihood ratios assigned to each risk and prodromal marker, and then transforming the resulting post-test odds to probabilities. 8 , 10 We defined a post-test probability ≥80% as probable and ≥50% as possible prodromal PD, respectively, consistent with recent evaluations of the MDS sore. 13 – 15 , 17 , 28 Assessment of Parkinson’s disease Our primary outcome was a new PD diagnosis, defined as newly clinician-diagnosed PD reported by a participant in either the 2016 or the 2018 HPFS follow-up questionnaires. We chose this definition to increase statistical power. In a subgroup of men who could be contacted and provided their consent, medical records were reviewed by a movement disorders specialist (AYH); a diagnosis was considered confirmed if the medical record included either a final diagnosis of PD by a neurologist or evidence of at least 2 of the 3 cardinal signs (rest tremor, rigidity, bradykinesia) in the absence of an alternative diagnosis. In the HPFS, over 85% of potential cases are confirmed to have PD. 29 Statistical Analysis We first evaluated the ability of composite measures to predict phenoconversion during follow-up, with 2014 as our baseline. For each composite measure, we estimated the risk ratio (RR) of PD and 95% confidence interval (CI) using age-adjusted log-binomial regression. For composite measures and selected individual features, we calculated positive predictive values (PPV), sensitivity, specificity, negative predictive values (NPV), and corresponding 95% CI. To account for our sampling strategy, participants were weighted by the inverse of their probability of being selected into the cohort, conditional on constipation and pRBD status. From men with a PD diagnosis confirmed by review of the medical records, and thus with known month and year of diagnosis, we calculated cumulative incidence curves using the Kaplan-Meier estimator. Because some prodromal features may be more predictive of PD at younger ages, we calculated RRs and PPVs in men under 75 years (approximate median age at baseline). We then conducted analyses to illustrate the evolution of non-motor PD features and the MDS score in the years leading up to a PD diagnosis. We used Sankey diagrams to describe the progression of combinations of constipation, pRBD, and hyposmia using data from 2012, 2014, and 2017. Self-reported hyposmia instead of hyposmia based on olfactory tests was used in 2012. We used box plots and age-adjusted linear mixed effects models to determine the longitudinal change in the MDS score (calculated in 2014 and 2017) before and after receiving a PD diagnosis. We also explored whether patterns in the presentation of non-motor PD features prior to disease diagnosis could identify prodromal PD subtypes using latent class regression analyses. Seven non-motor PD features previously explored in this cohort were considered (constipation, pRBD, hyposmia, impaired color vision, daytime somnolence, body pain, and depressive symptoms). 20 Features were assessed approximately two years before disease diagnosis. We fitted two-, three-, and four-class models and evaluated their performance using the Akaike information criterion (AIC) and Bayesian information criterion (BIC). All models included age, given its potential influence on class membership. We imputed missing values of prodromal features using data from the preceding assessment when available. Complete case analyses were then conducted. All statistical analyses were performed in SAS for UNIX version 9.4 (SAS Institute, Cary, NC) and R, version 3.6.0 (the R Foundation). Statistical significance was determined at the 5% level (2-sided). Results Our main analysis included 6,108 men (mean age 75.8 years) without a PD diagnosis in 2014. These men were followed for an average of 3.4 years (standard deviation 0.7), during which 103 were newly diagnosed with PD. Of these 103 men, 54 could be contacted and consented to a review of their medical records; a PD diagnosis was confirmed for 43 of the 54 men (10 had an uncertain diagnosis, and 1 did not have PD). Except for constipation, all individual and combined prodromal PD features were more common among men who subsequently developed PD ( Table 1 ). These men were also older than men who did not develop PD. Characteristics of men with a confirmed diagnosis did not differ significantly from those of all men who self-reported PD ( Table S3 ). Table 1. Characteristics of study participants * according to incident Parkinson’s disease (PD) status in 2018. Total population Incident PD diagnosis Yes No P Value n 6,108 103 6,005 Age in years, mean (SD) 75.8 (5.6) 77.3 (5.3) 75.8 (5.6) 0.006 Follow-up in years, mean (SD) 3.4 (0.7) 3.5 (0.7) 3.4 (0.7) 0.39 Constipation 2,738 (44.8) 50 (48.5) 2,688 (44.8) 0.44 pRBD 1,629 (26.7) 54 (52.4) 1,575 (26.2) &lt;0.001 Hyposmia 873 (14.3) 57 (55.3) 816 (13.6) &lt;0.001 All 3 features 136 (2.2) 17 (16.5) 119 (2.0) &lt;0.001 MDS Pr ≥0.5 594 (9.7) 43 (41.8) 551 (9.2) &lt;0.001 MDS Pr ≥0.8 243 (4.0) 30 (29.1) 213 (3.6) &lt;0.001 Parkinsonism 454 (7.4) 26 (25.2) 428 (7.1) &lt;0.001 + 3 features 21 (0.3) 4 (3.9) 17 (0.3) &lt;0.001 Values are numbers (percentages) unless stated otherwise. P values calculated using two-sample t-test for continuous variables and Chi-square test or Fisher’s exact test for categorical variables. PD diagnosis is based on newly clinician-diagnosed PD reported by a participant. SD: standard deviation. pRBD: Probable REM sleep behavior disorder. 3 features: co-occurrent pRBD, constipation, and hyposmia. * pRBD and constipation measured in 2012; other features measured in 2014. Phenoconversion to clinically manifest PD Both composite measures were strongly associated with the risk of phenoconversion over the 3-year follow-up period ( Fig 1 ; Table S4 ). Men with at least one of the three selected non-motor features had a higher risk of PD compared to men without these features ( Fig 1A ). Among individual features, the highest RR was observed for hyposmia, followed by pRBD and constipation ( Table S4 ). The RR was the highest among men with all three features (23.35; 95% CI 10.62–51.33). This RR was not materially affected by further adjustment for smoking, physical activity, caffeine intake, and diabetes (25.33; 95% CI 11.60–55.32). Similarly, the risk of PD increased with higher probabilities of prodromal PD, based on MDS criteria ( Fig 1C ). For men with probable prodromal PD (probability ≥0.8), the RR was 21.96 (11.17–43.17), relative to men with a probability ≤0.2. Cumulative incidence curves were in line with these findings ( Fig 1B and 1D ). Associations were strengthened among men aged &lt;75 years, especially for those with all three features and those with probable prodromal PD ( Table S4 ). Figure 1. Risk of incident Parkinson’s disease (PD) at 3 years according to composite measures of prodromal PD. Risk ratios are adjusted for age and weighted by the inverse of the probability of selection into the prodromal cohort. Risk ratios (95% CI) further adjusted for smoking, physical activity, caffeine intake, and diabetes were 5.02 (2.42, 10.39), 8.74 (4.26, 17.9), and 25.33 (11.60, 55.32) for 1, 2, and 3 features, compared to none, respectively. Robust standard errors were used to calculate valid 95% confidence intervals. Cumulative incidence curves calculated based on 43 confirmed cases with available date of diagnosis. Selected non-motor features are constipation, pRBD, and hyposmia. pRBD: probable REM sleep behavior disorder; RR: Risk ratio; CI: Confidence interval. MDS: Movement Disorders Society. The PPVs, sensitivity, specificity, and NPVs for composite measures and selected individual features are presented in Figure 2 and Table S5 . Composite measures had comparable PPVs, and both had greater PPVs than individual features. The PPV, denoting the proportion of individuals who phenoconverted within 3 years, was 12.5% (6.6–18.4) among men with the three selected non-motor features, and 13.9% (8.5–19.5) among men with probable prodromal PD. Men with the three features who additionally reported parkinsonism had a PPV of 19.1% (4.8–38.1); this PPV was even higher among men aged &lt;75 years ( Fig 2 , Table S5 ). Specificity values were also higher for composite measures than for individual features. In contrast, the highest sensitivity was observed for hyposmia (59.3; 46.6–70.0) followed by constipation (41.1; 30.4–53.0) and possible prodromal PD (35.7; 24.9–48.1). Due to the low incidence of PD (1.7%), NPVs were high for all measures. Figure 2. Probability of developing Parkinson’s disease (PD) at 3 years according to different measures of prodromal PD. Values are weighted by the inverse of the probability of being selected into the prodromal cohort and thus represent estimates in the underlying population from which prodromal cohort participants were selected. All prodromal features measured in 2014. Bootstrapping (n=1000) was used to calculate valid 95% confidence intervals. Values for Se, Sp, and NPV in the total population. PSA: Prostate specific antigen. FIT: Fecal immunochemical test; pRBD: Probable REM sleep behavior disorder; 3 features: co-occurrent pRBD, constipation, and hyposmia; MDS: Movements Disorders Society; Pr: Probability; PPV: Positive predictive value (%); Se: Sensitivity; Sp: Specificity; NPV: Negative predictive value; CI: Confidence interval. References: 1. Wolf AMD, Wender RC, Etzioni RB, et al. American Cancer Society guideline for the early detection of prostate cancer: update 2010. CA Cancer J Clin 2010; 60 : 70–98. 2. Bailey SER, Abel GA, Atkins A, et al. Diagnostic performance of a faecal immunochemical test for patients with low-risk symptoms of colorectal cancer in primary care: an evaluation in the South West of England. Progression of prodromal PD The co-occurrence of selected non-motor features increased over time among men who developed PD ( Fig 3A ). In 2012 (an approximate median of five years before disease diagnosis), 10% of men had co-occurrent constipation, pRBD, and hyposmia, and 27% had two of these features. These numbers rose to 13% and 37% in 2014 (an approximate median of two years before diagnosis), and to 22% and 41% in 2017 (around the time of diagnosis). In contrast, 80% of men who did not develop PD remained with one or no features over these five years, and only 4% had the three features at the 2017 assessment ( Fig 3B ). A similar pattern was observed when we used data on self-reported hyposmia in all years ( Fig S2 ). Figure 3. Evolution of selected non-motor features and the MDS-based probability of prodromal Parkinson’s disease (PD). A, B: included men with complete data in all assessments (PD=79, No PD=4,869). Hyposmia assessed based on olfactory testing except for 2012 where data from self-reports were used. C: included men with complete data in all assessments; data from all 79 men with PD and a random sample of 79 with No PD are presented for clarity. Median MDS scores in the whole sample of men with No PD were 0.03 and 0.05 in the first and second assessment, respectively. D: Age-adjusted predicted probability of prodromal PD based on 37 confirmed cases with complete data in 2014 and 2017. P-value for trend from an age-adjusted mixed effects model. pRBD: Probable REM sleep behavior disorder; 3 features: co-occurrent pRBD, constipation, and hyposmia; MDS: Movements Disorders Society. Similarly, the MDS score increased more in men who developed PD than in those who did not ( Fig 3C ). In the two years leading up to the disease diagnosis (median time), there was a substantial change from a median score of 0.32 (interquartile range 0.07–0.80) to a median score of 0.77 (0.25–0.93). In comparison, the median score among those who did not develop PD was 0.03 (0.01–0.12) and 0.05 (0.01–0.22) in the first and second assessment, respectively. Among men with a confirmed PD diagnosis, a linear increase in the MDS score was observed in the years leading up to the diagnosis, and this increase continued in the post-diagnostic period ( Fig 3D ). After adjusting for age, the estimated annual rate of increase in the mean MDS score was 0.08 (95% CI 0.04–0.11). Heterogeneity in the prodromal phase of PD In latent class regression analyses, model fit statistics (AIC and BIC; Table S6 ) suggested that the variability in the presentation of non-motor features prior to disease diagnosis (approximate median of two years) could be best explained by the presence of two distinct subgroups or classes. The first class comprised 71.4% of the men considered and was characterized by a significantly higher prevalence of pRBD ( Fig 4 , Table S7 ). The second class, comprising the remaining 28.9% of men, was characterized by a significantly higher prevalence of impaired color vision ( Fig 4 , Table S7 ). No significant differences were observed in the prevalence of the other features examined. Compared to men in class one, men in class two had a higher prevalence of parkinsonism (P=0.01) and were older at baseline (P&lt;0.001). The combination of constipation, hyposmia, and pRBD was present in 24.3% of men in class 1, but none of the men in class two ( Fig 4 ). Figure 4. Prevalence of pre-diagnostic non-motor features of Parkinson’s disease (PD) according to identified prodromal PD subtypes. Men who developed PD and had complete data were included (n=98). Mean values are presented for age and time to diagnosis. Time to diagnosis calculated based on 42 confirmed cases. All values, except for time to diagnosis, are based on 2014 assessments when individuals were free of PD. P-values calculated using two-sided Fisher’s exact test. Non-significant (n.s.) P-values were 0.14 for sleepiness, 0.13 for body pain, 0.99 for depressive symptoms, 0.37 for hyposmia, and 0.51 for constipation. RBD: REM sleep behavior disorder; 3 features: co-occurrent pRBD, constipation, and hyposmia; MDS: Movements Disorders Society; Pr: Probability; y: Years; mo: months. Discussion This prospective cohort study demonstrates that composite measures of prodromal PD, based on self-administered assessments, strongly predict the onset of clinically manifest PD within three years. The predictive value of these measures was comparable to those of tests used for the screening of colorectal and prostate cancer ( Fig 2 ). Notably, our measure based on the presence of three major non-motor PD features (constipation, pRBD, and hyposmia) had a similar predictive performance to that based on the MDS criteria, which requires information on several risk and prodromal markers. In addition, our study shows that, in the years leading up to disease diagnosis, there is an increase in the co-occurrence of constipation, pRBD, and hyposmia, as well as in the MDS score. Finally, we identified two potential prodromal PD subtypes where RBD and visual color impairment were key discriminators. Overall, our findings indicate that combinations of non-motor features can be integrated into low-cost screening tools to identify prodromal PD in broad populations. Our study is the most extensive prospective investigation to date examining how well composite measures of prodromal PD can predict future clinically manifest PD in a general population. Compared to the 6,108 participants in our study, the sample size in previous studies ranged from 121 to 961 participants, with fewer than 20 developing PD. 13 – 17 In line with our results, these studies reported high specificity and NPV among those with probable prodromal PD (based on the MDS criteria), but the sensitivity and PPV varied substantially and had broad confidence intervals. Studies of carriers of highly penetrant genetic variants 12 or polysomnography-confirmed RBD, 11 reported higher PPV; however, these individuals are not representative of the larger population of individuals with PD. Using low-cost, self-administered assessments, our study suggests that the MDS score and the co-occurrence of key prodromal features–constipation, pRBD, and hyposmia–can comparably identify individuals with a high risk of developing PD in a broader population. The potentially greater predictive ability of these measures in younger individuals warrants further exploration. Previous investigations have described the progression of prodromal PD based on retrospective data. 30 , 31 Our study is the first to show longitudinally that there is a temporal increase in the number of non-motor features and the MDS score throughout the prodromal phase. In the two years leading to diagnosis, the proportion of individuals experiencing the combination of constipation, hyposmia, and pRBD rose from 13% to 22%, while the median MDS score more than doubled. The only other study evaluating longitudinal changes in the MDS score included only ten individuals with PD, yet a similar qualitative increase in the score was observed. 14 The uniqueness of our data allowed us to estimate that, after accounting for age, the mean MDS score increases by 8 percentage points per year. Our results support the hypothesis that there is considerable variation in the symptoms and signs patients experience during the prodromal phase of PD. 18 Preclinical, pathological, and imaging studies point towards the existence of prodromal PD subtypes. 18 , 32 Among these, the most accepted are the “body-first” and “brain-first” subtypes, defined by the initial appearance (peripheral vs central nervous system) and temporal progression (bottom-up vs top-down) of α-synuclein pathology in the body. 18 , 32 Under this hypothesis, the “body-first” subtype is linked to the appearance of autonomic dysfunction and RBD before that of motor symptoms (bottom-up), whereas the “brain-first” subtype is RBD negative at earlier stages, and symptoms such as cognitive dysfunction and subtle motor abnormalities may first appear (top-down). Our data-driven approach suggested two prodromal PD subtypes, one with a substantially higher prevalence of RBD, and another one with a higher prevalence of visual color impairment and parkinsonism, which may respectively fall under the “body-first” and “brain-first” paradigm. While unique, our analyses are exploratory and based on data from the latest stage of the prodromal phase. Implications for prevention trials Our results have important implications for the planning of PD prevention trials. First, we demonstrate that simple, low-cost assessments, easily implemented in a primary care setting, 33 can be used to identify a population with a high probability of phenoconversion within 3 years. These assessments could be used to narrow down potential trial participants to a pool of individuals with a high probability of prodromal PD, who in a second step could undergo more specific but costly assessments, such as imaging studies 34 or α-synuclein seed amplification assays, 35 to decide trial enrollment. Because of the low prevalence of prodromal PD in the general population, conducting specialized assessment without pre-selecting individuals would result in a high number of false positive findings, and a waste of resources. The combination of constipation, pRBD, and hyposmia, may provide a simpler and more practical tool to screen for prodromal PD in large populations. Yet, the MDS score may provide more flexibility allowing researchers to set different thresholds depending on whether sensitivity or specificity is to be prioritized, at the cost of requiring more information. Further, considering the potential heterogeneity of prodromal PD could be useful for targeting neuroprotective interventions 18 and guiding trial duration, because both the efficacy of treatments and the time to clinically manifest PD may differ by subtype. 18 Finally, whereas phenoconversion is a feasible outcome in trials enrolling individuals in the later stage of the prodromal phase, alternative outcomes need to be considered for trials among individuals in the earlier stages. Our findings suggest that the temporal increase in the number of non-motor features and the MDS score could be surrogate outcomes of disease progression. Ultimately, the decision of which interventions to test should determine whom to enroll and these two criteria should inform the decision on how to measure disease progression. Strengths and limitations There are several strengths in our study. Its prospective cohort design makes our analyses less prone to measurement error and selection bias, compared to retrospective cohorts, case-control, and cross-sectional studies. Moreover, study participants are health professionals with access to health care, reducing the possibility that they had undiagnosed PD. Furthermore, the large sample size in our study enabled us to examine not only phenoconversion but also the progression and heterogeneity of the prodromal phase. Finally, the population-based design makes our findings more generalizable to a general PD population than studies of individuals with specific genetic traits or symptoms. Our study also has limitations. Participants were followed for a relatively short time; extending the follow-up will allow a more complete characterization of the natural history of prodromal PD. Furthermore, we conducted in-person examinations only in a small subset of participants, and thus relied on self-assessed prodromal features, which likely decreased the predictive ability of our measures. For example, our RBD assessment was based on the sleeping partner experience (as reported by study participants), which has a substantially lower predictive value (LR=2.3) compared to polysomnography (PSG)-confirmed RBD (LR=130). The individuals with PSG-confirmed RBD, however, are largely drawn from specialized sleep clinics and mostly include those with severe RBD – whether the severity of RBD is related to PD risk remains to be established. Regardless, a strength of our work is that we demonstrate that self-administered assessments can strongly contribute to predict future clinically manifest PD, even without the use of highly specialized ones such as PSG. In addition, we were not able to evaluate the ability of composite measures to predict other relevant alpha-synucleinopathies such as Dementia with Lewy Bodies. Yet, given their shared pathology, the measures evaluated here could in theory contribute to the early identification of these diseases. Lastly, our study population comprises a homogeneous group of male health professionals with an average age of 76 years; the assessments used may therefore not perform as well in other populations. Conclusion We show that composite measures of prodromal PD, based on cost-efficient assessments that are easily scalable, strongly predict phenoconversion at 3 years in a population-based cohort. We provide evidence of a temporal increase in the number of non-motor features and the MDS score in the years leading up to the disease diagnosis; both could serve as surrogate outcomes in prevention trials. Our data support the heterogeneity of prodromal PD, which was previously based mostly on pathological, preclinical, and imaging studies. Our study thus highlights the key role that simple, low-cost composite measures can play in overcoming the challenge of identifying individuals in the prodromal phase of PD and advancing the development of effective treatments. Supplementary Material Supinfo NIHMS2041565-supplement-Supinfo.pdf (834.2KB, pdf)