Introduction The transcatheter mitral valve edge-to-edge repair (TEER) procedure is a percutaneous transcatheter intervention for severe mitral regurgitation (MR) in patients who are deemed to have significant comorbidities. It is considered a minimally invasive procedure. However, pulmonary hypertension (pHTN) as a common concomitant pathology with MR makes anesthetic management of the procedure challenging and may lead to unexpected perioperative adverse events. Case presentation A 68-year-old male (102 kg and 175 cm) presented with severe MR. His past medical history was also significant for obstructive sleep apnea, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, chronic kidney disease, Type 2 diabetes mellitus, heart failure with reduced ejection fraction (HFrEF), atrial fibrillation (AFib) status post atrioventricular node ablation and permanent pacemaker placement, and coronary artery disease status post percutaneous coronary artery intervention. Due to recent heart failure episodes along with multiple comorbidities he was deemed to be a candidate for the TEER procedure. Preoperative airway evaluation showed that the patient had heavy facial hair with a Mallampati class III score and obese body habitus (body mass index 33). Vital signs in the preoperative units showed noninvasive blood pressure (NIBP) at 93/56 mmHg, ventricular rate paced at 80 bpm, and SpO2 of 92 % on room air. The patient was unable to lie flat due to shortness of breath, and was positioned with his head elevated at 45 degrees. A Grade V systolic murmur over parasternal area was appreciated. Transesophageal echocardiography (TTE) revealed left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 35 % to 40 % with global hypokinesis, severe MR, and moderate systolic dysfunction of the right ventricle (RV) with right ventricular systolic pressure (RVSP) estimated to be 50 mmHg. The right heart catheter revealed pHTN with a large pulmonary capillary wedge pressure V wave. Recent interrogation reported the patient’s Medtronic cardiac resynchronization therapy defibrillator to be on VVIR mode pacing at 80 bpm. Anesthesia induction was achieved with intravenous (IV) fentanyl 200 mcg and propofol 50 mg. After the loss of consciousness and the absence of lash reflex, difficult mask ventilation was encountered which did not improve after placement of oral airway and attempted two-handed ventilation. To improve mask ventilation, rocuronium 70 mg was administered. The patient desaturated quickly without measurable NIBP. Electrocardiography showed paced rhythm at 80 bpm but there were no palpable pulses. A laryngeal mask airway was immediately inserted with successful ventilation showing end-tidal carbon dioxide (ETCO 2 ) of 14 mmHg. The patient was subsequently intubated with an endotracheal tube. While securing the airway, 2 boluses of diluted epinephrine 4 mcg/ml were administered intravenously after several initial doses of IV ephedrine and phenylephrine boluses were not effective, and brief chest compressions were performed to facilitate the vasoactive medications circulating in the presence of the severe MR. Subsequently, the patient’s NIBP was restored to 95/55 mmHg. Transesophageal echocardiography showed biventricular systolic dysfunctions and confirmed severe MR with elevated right heart pressure ( Fig. 1 , Fig. 2 ). A radial arterial line was established, and an arterial blood gas exam revealed a grossly normal range of electrolytes and acid-base status. The patient was further stabilized with an epinephrine infusion at 0.03 mcg/kg/min. Anesthesia was maintained with sevoflurane with a minimum alveolar concentration of 0.8 and intermittent rocuronium. The surgical team proceeded with the planned TEER procedure using fluoroscopy and TEE guidance for femoral vein access, transseptal approach, and introduction of MitraClip into bilateral leaflet mitral valve insertion and position confirmation. TEER was a success, demonstrated by postdeployment TEE that MR was significantly reduced from severe to mild ( Fig. 3 ), and the transmitral gradient remained at 2 mmHg. However, after the removal of the sheath from the left atrium, a significant right-to-left (R-L) shunting through the iatrogenic atrial septal defect (iASD) was detected on TEE ( Fig. 4 ). The size of the shunt was estimated to be 0.5 cm. The patient’s SpO2 nadired at 90 % with a fraction of inspired oxygen of 60 %. Considering hypoxemia and the risk of paradoxical embolism, the interventionist team selected an appropriate size of Amplatzer occluder device to seal the iASD ( Fig. 5 ). The result was satisfactory with minimal residual shunting ( Fig. 6 ). Fig. 1. Preoperative TEE: severe mitral regurgitation revealed in middle esophageal long axis view. Fig. 2. Preoperative TEE: signs of elevated right-side chamber pressure revealed in modified middle esophageal right ventricle inflow and outflow view. Fig. 3. Intraoperative TEE in middle esophageal long axis view: mitral regurgitation resolved after MitraClip deployment. Fig. 4. Intraoperative TEE in middle esophageal bicaval view: right-to-left shunt flow through iASD demonstrated by color flow Doppler. Fig. 5. Intraoperative 3D TEE: Amplatzer device occluded the iASD. Fig. 6. Intraoperative TEE modified middle esophageal bicaval view: iASD occluded by Amplatzer device. After the procedure, the patient was hemodynamically stable to wean off inotropic support and was extubated in the operating room. The patient had an uneventful intensive care unit recovery and was discharged home on postoperative day 2. At the postoperative 30-day follow-up visit, the patient exhibited significant improvement of symptoms and physical activity. Postprocedure TTE showed mild residual MR and normalized RV systolic function and pressures. Discussion Mitral valve regurgitation can be classified into 3 different types based on Carpentier classification 1 : Type 1, without mitral valve leaflet pathology and only the dilation of the mitral annulus resulting in poor coaptation of leaflets; Type 2, excessive motion of leaflets, such as flail leaflets; and Type 3, limited motion of mitral leaflets, most commonly from ischemia. There are 3 major pathophysiological implications of MR: left ventricle (LV) dilation and dysfunction, pulmonary hypertension, and atrial fibrillation. 2 Chronic volume overload led to LV chamber enlargement, remodeling, and eventually contractile dysfunction. Long-term flow regurgitation into the left atrium causes high left atrial pressure (LAP), atrial enlargement, and fibrosis, which is the pathogenesis of atrial fibrillation, and in turn compromises cardiac output. At the same time, substantially elevated LAP, which is passively transmitted backward into the pulmonary veins, can lead to Group 2 pHTN according to the World Health Organization classification. 3 Pulmonary vein congestion chronically influences the remodeling of the alveolar-capillary unit hallmarked by excessive type IV collagen deposition, pulmonary hypertension, and eventually RV dysfunction. The optimal time of open surgery for MR is traditionally considered to be before the development of irreversible ventricular dysfunction, and patients with severe left ventricular dysfunction are deemed poor candidates secondary to dismal outcomes. 4 Minimally invasive structural heart intervention is increasingly in demand because it is a less traumatic procedure compared to traditional sternotomy. It may improve clinical symptoms, lead to a speedier recovery, and result in less perioperative complications, all of which contribute to improved overall patient outcomes. 5 Multiple studies have reported clinical outcomes for severe MR patients with compromised left ventricular function who have undergone the TEER procedure. 6 , 7 , 8 In general, these studies suggest that the TEER procedure is an effective therapeutic option to improve clinical functional status and quality of life in high-risk MR patients with severe left ventricular dysfunction. 9 , 10 As it has been gradually adopted by the medical community, the TEER procedure has been shown to be a safe and feasible therapeutic intervention for primary MR. 9 Further clinical trials compare secondary severe MR patients who were treated by guideline-directed medical management with those treated by transcatheter mitral valve repair. The results show sustained improvement in MR severity and quality of life, and less heart failure–associated hospitalization. 8 , 11 , 12 The TEER procedure has been subsequently expanded for the treatment of secondary MR in high-risk and inoperable patients, achieving FDA approval in 2019. Despite the success and popularity of the minimally invasive approach, it is not without controversy. The procedure itself is technically challenging, and the outcome may be associated with interoperational variability and conflicting results. 6 In patients with other conditions, such as pulmonary hypertension or a calcified mitral annulus, there can be greater technical difficulty with potential perioperative complications or worse quality of MR reduction. 13 , 14 Recent systematic review studies have shown that the overall composite outcome after TEER procedure is better in patients with nonischemic MR than in those with ischemic MR. 11 This meta-analysis suggests that careful patient selection may be essential for the success of the complex minimally invasive transcatheter mitral valve repair. Despite the numerous studies supporting this repair over a traditional sternotomy, 15 mid- and long-term outcomes will continue to be analyzed and debated. Preoperative management of MR patients includes evaluation and optimization of the 3 major pathologies: heart failure, AFib, and pulmonary hypertension. Our patient had HFrEF, which was managed by the cardiology team with afterload reduction medication and a cardiac resynchronization therapy defibrillator. He had a history of AFib with rapid ventricular response which was treated with atrioventricular node ablation and biventricular pacing. Severe MR with decompensated LV function and pulmonary hypertension still made him vulnerable to anesthetic agents with negative inotropic effects. 16 The reported EF obtained via echocardiography in such patients overestimates cardiac performance due to a large portion of the stroke volume going through a deficient mitral valve into the left atrium instead of through the aortic valve to generate a forward flow to produce actual stroke volume. The myocardium of the left ventricle may work against a relatively low resistance incompetent valve and may need inotropic support immediately after MR correction for the adaptation to contract against the systemic resistance. Pulmonary hypertension and RV failure may not be improved immediately after MR correction. The anesthesia goal is to achieve sustainable hemodynamic stability to promote forward flow with a relative high heart rate, inotropic support, and to reduce systemic and pulmonary vascular resistance. 17 Patients with obesity, obstructive sleep apnea, and heavy facial hair are prone to difficult mask ventilation. Hypoxia and hypercarbia resulting from inadequate ventilation trigger worsening pulmonary hypertension which further compromise cardiac output and exacerbated right ventricle dysfunction. 13 , 14 Immediate placement of the laryngeal mask airway device to achieve effective ventilation and oxygenation is crucial to avoid further deleterious cardiopulmonary status. 18 Strategies to optimize preoxygenation and apneic oxygenation are used to prolong safe apnea time and to improve apneic tolerance. 19 The routine preoxygenation technique prior to anesthesia induction is to administer 100 % oxygen via a tight-fitting face mask for at least 3 min of tidal volume breathing or 8 times of vital capacity breathing (i.e., deep breathing) over the course of 1 min to reach a goal of end-tidal oxygen concentration of ≥ 90 %. Reverse Trendelenburg positioning of the patient helps to increase functional residual capacity and prolong tolerance of apnea time. 20 For high-risk patients or emergency intubation, noninvasive techniques of applying positive airway pressures are used for preoxygenation, such as applying continuous airway pressure or high flow nasal oxygenation. 21 In situations with limited equipment, administering oxygen via nasal cannula at 15 L/min in addition to oxygen at 10 to 12 L/min via tight fitting face mask with PEEP at 5 cm H2O was shown to be effective. 22 Apneic oxygenation is a process by which oxygen moves by mass flow through the upper airways and into the alveoli in the absence of any respiratory effort. A pressure gradient is created by the differential rates of oxygen removal from and carbon dioxide diffusion into the lungs. 23 Some studies of apneic oxygenation with standard nasal cannula and nasopharyngeal airway showed efficacy. Apneic oxygenation has also been used as the primary airway technique for laryngeal surgery. 24 It is important to note that apneic oxygenation techniques do not provide ventilation or remove carbon dioxide. 25 Thus, for patients with pHTN reported in this case who tolerate neither hypoxia nor hypercapnia, the best strategy is to minimize apnea time. Noninvasive ventilation techniques per the American Society of Anesthesiologists’ airway guidelines 18 are well known to practicing anesthesiologists. Our patient’s initial presentation with no palpable pulse or measurable NIBP was suspected as pulseless electrical activity (PEA). A pseudo-PEA refers to pulses that fail to be detected by palpation pulse but are successfully detected by arterial line waveform, point-of-care ultrasound, or ETCO 2 . 26 , 27 Regarding our case, after laryngeal mask airway insertion and ventilation, ETCO 2 was measured at 14 mmHg, which indicated there was still detectable cardiac output. Subsequent TEE confirmed that the patient’s hemodynamic deterioration episode was a pseudo-PEA, or profound cardiogenic shock. Chest compressions were performed briefly to facilitate diluted epinephrine efficiently circulating through a severely regurgitated mitral valve. Because of the timely recognition of cardiogenic shock rather than PEA, diluted boluses of 4 mcg/ml of epinephrine were given instead of the standard resuscitation dose of 1 mg of epinephrine IV boluses as advanced cardiac life support (ACLS) guidelines recommend. 28 This rapidly stabilized the patient’s hemodynamic status without causing excessive cardiovascular stress. After initial stabilization of vital signs, a differential diagnosis of sudden cardiovascular collapse is worth investigating and may guide further management, which commonly includes (but is not limited to) anaphylaxis, pulmonary embolism (PE), pneumothorax, hypovolemia, anesthetic overdose, and acute myocardial infarction. Anaphylaxis is defined as an acute and life-threatening systemic hypersensitivity reaction to certain allergen(s) mediated by the massive release of physiologically active mediators (tryptase, histamines, etc.) by mast cell degranulation. 29 Clinical presentations of anaphylaxis include increased airway pressure, bronchospasm, airway edema, hypotension, vasoplegia, cardiac dysfunction, arrhythmia, and cardiac arrest, as well as skin flushing and urticaria. In some cases, cardiovascular collapse can be the initial and only presentation. The key pathophysiology of cardiovascular collapse is vasoplegia and hypovolemia caused by vasoactive inflammatory mediators from mast cell degranulation. Therefore, the key initial treatments are fluid resuscitation and early use of epinephrine. In our case of cardiovascular collapse after induction, the fact that laryngeal mask airway insertion achieved adequate oxygenation and ventilation with normal airway pressures and bilateral clear breathing sounds made it less possible that it was a case of bronchospasm, pneumothorax, or PE. Most importantly, hemodynamic stability was achieved without volume resuscitation. Combined with the clinical presentation, our case’s cardiovascular collapse was unlikely to have resulted from anaphylaxis. Of note, evaluating the serum tryptase level in 2 h′ time frame would help with the definitive diagnosis or exclusion of anaphylaxis. In our case, because the clinical presentation was unlikely to be anaphylaxis, the tryptase level was not obtained. Transesophageal echocardiography is an integral component of perioperative management, including surgical and anesthetic decision-making. Severe mitral regurgitation can lead to dilatation of the left atrium, systolic flow reversal on the pulmonary vein Doppler exam, and a more than 50 % regurgitating volume into the left atrium during systole. The etiology of the anatomic cause of regurgitation and the predominant regurgitant location must be assessed. The TEER procedure requires a transseptal approach to deliver the mitral clip; thus, accurate identification of the height from the transseptal location to the mitral annulus level is essential. In addition to the routine TEE exam, 3D echocardiography can provide invaluable and complementary information to fluoroscopy-guided successful mitral clip placement. 30 , 31 The puncture site should be the superior and posterior portion of the interatrial septum, where it is much easier to facilitate MitraClip manipulation and placement. After systematic heparinization, the MitraClip delivery system crosses the interatrial septum and is steered across the mitral annulus. After position optimization under the guidance of TEE, the TEER procedure is initiated to grasp both leaflets and form a stable tissue bridge resulting in significant reduction of MR. Severe pulmonary hypertension, as seen in our patient, can cause septal bowing into the left atrium, significantly limiting device maneuverability. Likewise, transseptal puncture performed during the TEER procedure usually yields clinically insignificant shunt, and indications for repair of the iASD are not well described. 32 Most of the time iASD with left-to-right shunt is benign and will resolve spontaneously. A prospective study following up with patients 1 year after TEER procedures reports that 24 % developed iASDs with left-to-right shunt resulting in right heart enlargement. 33 Another study showed that iASD is associated with a higher death rate 6 months postoperatively. 34 However, literature reports of R-L shunt were rare. In our case, pulmonary hypertension resulted in a significant R-L shunt through the iASD that was detected by color flow doppler on TEE, which necessitated immediate surgical intervention. Otherwise, the patient’s condition may have led to significant mortality and morbidity if the iASD had been left untreated. Conclusion Our case report highlighted 2 distinctive intraoperative events of a patient with severe MR and pHTN undergoing the TEER procedure: rapid and profound cardiogenic shock after apnea episode and significant R-L shunt of iASD after clip deployment, where pulmonary hypertension played a pivotal role in both events. An in-depth understanding of the pathophysiology of MR and the TEER procedure sets the foundation for risk assessment and anesthesia planning. Moreover, application of TEE is essential in resuscitation optimization and surgical decision making.