Abstract Cellular membranes serve as an epicenter combining extracellular and cytosolic components with membranous effectors, which together support numerous fundamental cellular signaling pathways that mediate biological responses. To execute their functions, membrane proteins, lipids and carbohydrates arrange, in a highly coordinated manner, into well-defined assemblies displaying diverse biological and biophysical characteristics that modulate several signaling events. The loss of membrane homeostasis can trigger oncogenic signaling. More recently, it has been documented that select membrane active dietaries (MADs) can reshape biological membranes and subsequently decrease cancer risk. In this review, we emphasize the significance of membrane domain structure, organization and their signaling functionalities as well as how loss of membrane homeostasis can steer aberrant signaling. Moreover, we describe in detail the complexities associated with the examination of these membrane domains and their association with cancer. Finally, we summarize the current literature on MADs and their effects on cellular membranes, including various mechanisms of dietary chemoprevention/interception and the functional links between nutritional bioactives, membrane homeostasis and cancer biology. Keywords: cancer therapy, chemoprevention, dietary bioactives, endomembranes, intracellular trafficking, lipid rafts, membrane order, nanoclusters, oncogenes, plasma membrane Graphical Abstract Here, we overview membrane domain structure, organization, signaling functionalities and how loss of membrane homeostasis can promote aberrant signaling. Moreover, we describe the challenges studying membrane domains and their association with cancer biology. Finally, we summarize current knowledge on membrane active dietaries (MADs) and their effects on cellular membranes, including mechanisms of dietary chemoprevention/interception and therapeutics, establishing a functional link between dietary nutritional bioactives, membrane homeostasis and cancer. Introduction Biological membranes are amphiphilic bilayered sheaths, between 3 to 10 nm thick, that define the boundaries of all cells and the diversity of the internal compartments in eukaryotes[ 1 - 4 ]. These cellular structures represent the oldest (still valid) canonical molecular model, i.e., the lipid bilayer, of highly complex and heterogenous membranes[ 5 , 6 ]. In general, biological membranes are composed of a phospholipid bilayer, which affords them with the properties of fluidity and elasticity[ 7 , 8 ]. However, it is critical to highlight that cellular membranes are composed of not only lipids but are also packed with proteins and carbohydrates[ 9 ]. For instance, proteins account for roughly fifty percent or more of the total mass of most cellular membranes and a striking thirty percent of the proteins encoded by the human genome are targeted to these structures[ 10 - 12 ]. Moreover, many membrane proteins and lipids are glycosylated, a critical process associated with protein quality control, cell adhesion, differentiation and signaling initiation, which has been linked to neurological, autoimmune diseases and cancer[ 13 , 14 ]. Overall, cell membranes are two-dimensional fluid mosaic assemblies capable of occupying three-dimensional spaces[ 15 , 16 ]. Biological membranes serve to support different cell types and organelles by maintaining their distinct identity and integrity. For example, a damaged and leaky mitochondrial or plasma membrane (PM), if not repaired in a timely manner, triggers a series of enzymatic steps that inevitably results in cell death[ 17 , 18 ]. Notably, the consequences of membrane damage extend from cell death to other cellular processes associated with muscular dystrophy, immunity, infectious diseases and cancer, thus further emphasizing the significance of cellular membranes[ 19 ]. Membranes are also highly dynamic systems that act as recruitment focal points for different types of molecular machineries, which perform vital cellular functions such as cell sensing and communication, energy production and conservation, signal transduction and host substrate exchange, to name a few[ 3 ]. In addition, this active cell structure is responsible for the lateral organization and compartmentalization of proteins, lipids, and their chemically-modified counterparts into distinct specialized assemblies that perform many of the fundamental cellular activities required for life and programmed cell death (apoptosis)[ 20 , 21 ] ( Fig. 1 ). Not surprisingly, this remarkable fluid-mosaic has drawn increasing attention to biologists, chemists and physicists in great part due to its highly complex biochemical and biophysical properties. Figure 1. Cellular membrane domain structure and organization . Open in a new tab A) Schematic overview of the plasma membrane and several membrane-bound organelles that make up part of the cellular endomembrane system. Membranes are highly dynamic structures that can move intracellularly from the plasma membrane as part of the endocytic pathway. Endocytosis leads to the formation of membrane vesicles, i.e., early endosomes (1), whose lipid bilayer composition resembles that of the plasma membrane. These vesicles mature to form multivesicular structures or late endosomes (2), which can fuse to lysosomes (endolysosome system) (3), or traffic back to the plasma membrane via recycling endosomes (4 and 5). Other key members of the endomembrane system are the nucleus and endoplasmic reticulum (ER). Interestingly, these two organelles work closely together as evidenced by the fact that they share a common continuous membrane bilayer (6). The ER membrane also interacts with the outer mitochondrial membrane (OMM) and a series of proteins, which form a dynamic bridge structure. This dynamic connection is referred to as mitochondria-associated endoplasmic reticulum membranes (MAMs) (7). MAMs domains are indispensable for the execution of a series of cellular functionalities. B) Compartmentalization of proteo-lipid complexes into specialized domains in the plasma membrane . Multiple proteins and lipids assemble in an orchestrated manner to form distinct specialized membrane domains (purple, orange, green and gray regions), thus creating lateral (horizontal axis) heterogeneity in the plasma membrane. Moreover, plasma membrane heterogeneity is displayed across the lipid bilayer vertical axis, resulting in highly organized domains in both the plasma membrane exofacial and cytofacial leaflets. The latter is not disconnected from the former rather they are coupled, thereby facilitating bilayer crosstalk between inner and outer proteolipid components, which is essential for cellular signaling. Liquid ordered phase (Lo) (purple and orange membrane regions) and liquid disordered phase (Ld) (green and gray membrane regions) domains display distinct biochemical, i.e., protein, lipid and carbohydrate, compositions and biophysical, e.g., membrane rigidity, characteristics. The Lo domains are enriched in cholesterol, sphingolipids, glycolipids, and saturated glycerophospholipids as well as lipidated and glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI)-anchored proteins (GPI-APs), thus generating lipid raft and raft-like domains. In contrast, the Ld domains, also known as non-rafts, are enriched in polyunsaturated and branched lipids. Additionally, formation, organization and stabilization of these membrane domains are believed to involve cortical actin (cytoskeleton). Finally, these diverse proteolipid domains, shown as purple, orange, green and gray regions, exclude one another, yet they all coexist to form the plasma membrane. Consequently, together these domains form a multifunctional highly complex and dynamic signaling platform. C) MAMs and their functionalities . 1. Lipid synthesis and transfer . MAMs are involved in the synthesis of PS. These structures can generate PS through PSS. Subsequently, PS localized in the ER is transported to the mitochondria and later converted to PE. MAMs can also mediate the trafficking of cholesterol between organelles. In this case, ER-localized caveolin-1 transfers cholesterol from the ER into the mitochondria membrane. 2. Ca 2+ trafficking and apoptosis . Another functionality of MAMs is the modulation of programmed cell death. To initiate the apoptosis signaling cascade, IP3R1, localized in the ER membrane, transfers Ca 2+ from the ER to mitochondria via VDAC1, which leads to Ca 2+ trafficking into the mitochondrial matrix via MCU. The resulting increased mitochondrial Ca 2+ levels, triggers the opening of mPTP. Stimulation of Casp8 leads to the activation of downstream caspases and modulation of BCL and PTEN. These proteins, i.e., BCL and PTEN, maintain intraorganellar Ca 2+ trafficking. Additionally, SERCA, another MAM-associated protein, removes Ca 2+ from the cytosolic space. 3. Mitochondria dynamics . MAM domains are involved in mitochondria fission. The fission by mitochondria involves MFN1/2 and MFN2, which are localized in the outer mitochondrial membrane (OMM). The recruitment of DRP1, a mitochondrial fission protein, to MAMs involves Mff, Fis1 and Syntaxin-17. 4. Autophagy. Under normal conditions, Syntaxin-17 interacts with DRP1 in MAMs. However, in the absence of nutrients, DRP1 is replaced by the pre-autophagosome marker ATG14L, which upregulates mTOR and AKT, and triggers the formation of the autophagosome. 5. ROS and ER stress . MAMs are able to modulate cellular oxidative stress. Under oxidative conditions, p66Shc is phosphorylated, which leads to the relocalization of p66Shc into MAMs. This triggers ROS production, which in turn induces ER stress via IRE1 and PERK. 6. Inflammation. Finally, MAMs play a key role in the modulation of the inflammasome. To initiate this process, NLRP3 traffics from the ER to MAMs where it binds its protein adaptor ASC and TXNIP, which subsequently leads to the formation of the inflammasome. PSS, phosphatidylserine synthase; inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor type 1; VDAC1, voltage-dependent anion-selective channel protein 1; MCU, mitochondrial calcium uniporter; mPTP, mitochondrial permeability transition pore; CASP8, caspase 8; BCL, B cell lymphoma; PTEN, phosphatase and tensin homolog; SERCA, sarco/endoplasmic reticulum Ca 2+ -ATPase; MFN1, mitofusin 1; MFN2, mitofusin 2; DRP, dynamin-related protein 1; Mff, mitochondrion fission factor; Fis1, fission 1 protein; ATG14L, autophagy-related 14-like; mTOR, mammalian target of rapamycin; AKT, serine/threonine kinase; ROS, reactive oxygen species; p66Shc, member of Src homologous-collagen homologue family of adapter proteins; IRE1, inositol-requiring enzyme 1; PERK, inositol-requiring enzyme 1; NLRP3, pyrin domain-containing 3 protein; ASC, apoptosis-associated speck-like protein; TXNIP, thioredoxin interacting protein. With respect to cancer biology, it has been increasingly recognized that the configuration, architecture, and biophysical attributes of cell membranes and their signal modulating capability can be chronically perturbed[ 22 - 25 ]. In this context, protein, lipid and carbohydrate conglomerates can be organized to form distinct micro- or nanodomains that receive, process and transmit cellular events[ 26 - 31 ]. The formation, organization, structure, and biophysical status, e.g., the degree of membrane fluidity, of these specialized domains are modulated by cortical actin and the composition of lipids and proteins ( Fig. 1 )[ 32 , 33 ]. It has become apparent that these domains are a prime feature of all cell membranes and mediate critical signaling and homeostatic processes, including the stabilization of β-catenin via stimulation of Wnt pathway-associated receptors[ 34 - 36 ], epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) signaling[ 37 , 38 ], activation of downstream MAPK/ERK signaling through membrane-bound Ras proteins[ 39 - 41 ], lipid trafficking for the formation of cholesterol-rich subdomains[ 33 , 42 ] and inter-organellar crosstalk between the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and mitochondria at mitochondria-associated endoplasmic reticulum membranes (MAMs)[ 43 , 44 ] ( Table 1 ). It is noteworthy, that the loss of biological membrane homeostasis, in part due to the dysregulation of distinct cellular pathways driven by gene mutations as well as changes in protein and lipid levels and organization, alters the degree of proteo-lipid clustering, thereby creating a membrane microenvironment that initiates cancer-related signaling processes[ 45 - 48 ]. Table 1. Nanoscale proteolipid clusters relevant to cancer biology. Main Protein Lipids Effectors Size (~) Technique Function References (PMID) EGFR PA, PIP 2 Grb2, PI3K, SOS1 20-30 nm, 200 NL, 300 LC EM, dSTORM Proliferation, Migration 20516214, 25001389 KRas-GTP PA, PIP 3 , PS PI3K, Raf 6 nm EM, FLIM-FRET Proliferation, Survival 25234412, 19115142 HRas-GDP PIP 2 , PIP 3 , PI3P, PI4P, PS, Chol 11 nm EM, FLIM-FRET - 25234412, 19115142 HRas-GTP PIP 3 , PI4P, PS PI3K, Raf 6nm EM, FLIM-FRET Proliferation, Survival, Migration 25234412, 19115142 Rac1 PIP 2 , PIP 3 Tiam1, WAVE 200 nm STORM,TIRF SPT-PALM Cytoskeleton, Migration 29141223 Frizzled Chol Dvl, LRP5/6 β-Catenin, Stemness 25024088, 28377511, 15459103, 19619488 Lrp5/6 PIP 2 Axin, Ck1, Frizzled, GSK3 100 nm, +WNT 200 nm STORM β -Catenin, Stemness 23400998, 19619488 Lypd6 LRP5/6 100 nm STED β -Catenin, Stemness 28404749 Dvl PA, PIP 2 , PS, Chol Axin, Frizzled &gt; 500 nm EM, FRAP, FLIP, TIRF β -Catenin, Stemness 25024088, 11101902, 24606934, 19234454, 17529994, 16263762, 19619488 Open in a new tab Mounting experimental evidence suggest that cell membranes can be “targeted” by pleiotropic dietary bioactives (i.e., m embrane a ctive d ietaries, MADs), which in turn facilitate the remodeling of membrane domains[ 49 - 52 ]. Therefore, it is plausible that select MADs could be employed as a tool to diminish cancer risk by abating oncogenic signaling activity via modulation of the organization of essential proteins and lipids at cellular membranes. Thus, MADs potentially serve as cell membrane-specific chemoprotective agents for cancer therapy[ 53 - 56 ]. In this review, we describe the importance of biological membranes as central cellular hubs that amalgamate numerous cues to choreograph dysregulated signaling pathways, resulting in tumorigenesis. Moreover, we provide insight into the currently available toolsets employed to examine membrane-associated proteo-lipid complexes and downstream signaling processes. Lastly, we critically appraise the current literature focusing on MAD-related modulators of membrane structure and organization, including their putative mechanisms of action. Structure and Organization of Cellular Membranes One of the main protagonists encompassing biological membranes, the cell plasma membrane, acts as a roadblock that mediates the bidirectional motion of a plethora of molecules between the extracellular and cytosolic space of cells. This process, by virtue of its limiting nature, grants safekeeping to cells from foreign substances in their external environment. Additionally, the cell plasma membrane functions as a point of initial contact between cells and multiple signaling molecular components that enable cells to “talk to each other”. Moreover, this membranous fluid-mosaic structure is accountable for the formation of specialized assemblies, e.g., lipid rafts[ 57 ], where proteins, lipids, carbohydrates and their chemically-modified counterparts are compartmentalized to execute the quintessential cellular activities indispensable for survival ( Fig 1 ). Plasma membrane structure and biochemical composition The structure of the plasma membrane is defined by an assorted mixture of lipids, proteins and carbohydrates, whose precise organization is essential for its functionality[ 58 , 59 ]. Driven in great part by hydrophobic effects[ 60 ], lipids self-arrange into lipid aggregates forming a closely packed bilayer system ( Fig. 1 ). Lipids at the plasma membrane possess the ability to diffuse laterally via different modes and, notably, engage in phase separation to form non-homogenous membrane regions ( Fig. 2 , compartmentalization ). Some of the first evidence promoting the concept of plasma membrane domain heterogeneity stemmed from the appreciation that biological membranes can be separated into detergent-resistant and detergent-labile distinguishable domains[ 61 , 62 ]. The existence, configuration and dynamics of these discrete plasma membrane compartments have been studied in exquisite detail ever since. Numerous reports have described the presence of ordered or rigid (Lo) and disordered or fluid (Ld) phases in the plasma membrane[ 63 - 67 ]. It is now broadly recognized that the Lo phase, a highly condensed/ordered domain, is enriched in cholesterol and saturated sphingolipids, while the Ld phase, a relatively disordered (fluid) domain, is enriched in unsaturated glycerophospholipids[ 8 , 68 , 69 ]. Figure 2. Modulation of lipid and protein organization in cellular membrane domains and their functions. Open in a new tab A) Membrane structure, proteolipid organization and signaling . Highly dynamic interactions between protein and lipid molecules shape features displayed by specialized membrane domains. The preferential interactions between specific proteins and lipids, e.g., cholesterol, can induce precise spatial compartmentalization of defined membrane components, thus creating molecularly well-defined domains or compartments. This, in turn, modulates cellular membrane-associated signaling by facilitating the recruitment of specific signaling protein and lipid effectors at an exact location and time. Another important feature of membrane domains is transbilayer coupling . In this scenario, proteins and lipids, e.g., PS and GPI-anchored proteins, are organized in membrane domains within a bilayer with distinctive exofacial and cytofacial leaflets. These leaflets differ in terms of their lipid and protein compositions. Accordingly, membrane domains localized in the exofacial leaflet can induce the formation of proteolipid assemblies in the cytofacial leaflet. Inner leaflet effector organization is regulated by complex interactions between the cytoskeleton, lipids and other proteins. These proteolipid assemblies localized at the cytofacial leaflet can influence other effectors located in the exofacial leaflet and engage in transbilayer coupling. This is noteworthy, because transbilayer coupling is a mechanism by which membrane domain components are brought together at opposing sides of the membrane bilayer to efficiently signal. Finally, another fundamental feature of membrane domains is proteolipid clustering . In multiple cases, formation of protein and lipid clusters requires a stimulus to initiate the rearrangement of cluster forming molecules between different membrane domains, resulting in the activation and oligomerization of these molecules. Cell membrane clusters contain a variety of protein functionalities that can originate from different cellular compartments, including the plasma membrane and cytosol. Clustering of multiple functionalities at membranes modulate membrane molecule diffusion, which in turn enhances signaling robustness. B) Cholesterol uptake and efflux . (1) Low density receptor (LDLR) can bind VLDL, LDL and chylomicrons to mobilize cholesterol inside cells. (2) These particles are endocytosed via clathrin-mediated endocytosis as part of clathrin-coated vesicles. Subsequently, (3) endosomes fuse with lysosomes and (4) unesterified “free” cholesterol is transported to various cell compartments, including ER, PM and mitochondria according to cellular needs. The ER regulates most of the cholesterol homeostasis-associated processes in the cell. In the ER, (5) unesterified cholesterol downregulates the nuclear translocation of SREBP, decreasing HMGCR activity and transcription. (6) Excess free cholesterol can be esterified by the enzyme ACAT and stored in lipid droplets to avoid cell lipotoxicity. Alternatively, cells can transport excess free cholesterol to the extracellular space via the activity of the ATP binding cassette (ABC) family of cholesterol transporters in a process referred as cholesterol efflux. ABCA1 and ABCG1 are the most studied members of the family. (7) ABCA1 transports free cholesterol to lipid poor ApoA1 or nascent HDL particles while (8) ABCG1 lipidates mature HDL particles. ACAT, acyl-coenzyme A (CoA):cholesterol acyltransferase; SREBP, sterol regulatory-element binding protein; HMGCR, 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA reductase; ABCA1, ATP binding cassette subfamily A member 1; ABCG1, ATP binding cassette subfamily G member 1; ApoA1, apolipoprotein A1. Lipid rafts Arising out of the extensive body of evidence associated with coexisting Lo and Ld domains, a plasma membrane-centric lipid raft model has emerged[ 70 ]. The most up-to-date general agreement depicts lipid rafts as heterogeneous, highly dynamic membrane regions that range from 10 to 200 nm in size. These specialized nanodomains are localized in the exoplasmic leaflet of the plasma membrane and lipids such as cholesterol, sphingolipids, glycolipids and saturated glycerophospholipids along with lipidated and glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI)-anchored proteins [ 57 , 71 ]. Notably, lipid rafts possess the ability to form higher order nanodomains (&gt; 300 nm) under specific conditions. The formation of larger microdomains appears to be dependent on selective lipid-lipid and protein-lipid interactions or clustering. Although the regions encompassed by lipid rafts and raft-like domains are relatively small in size, they are presumed to account for a relatively large fraction of the plasma membrane[ 72 , 73 ]. Importantly, the proteo-lipid structure and organization of rafts is cell type specific and varies between distinct cell types[ 73 - 75 ]. This cell-to-cell diversity is, in great part, driven by complex interactions between lipid raft molecular components and the cytoskeleton as well as the relative levels of bioactive lipids within these plasma membrane domains. Furthermore, lipid raft domains appear to have diverse proteo-lipid compositions. Multiple lipids and proteins have been shown to coalesce into specialized membrane nanodomains ( Table 1 ). Ergo, it has been proposed that the components that makeup the structure of the plasma membrane are not organized in a two-dimensional fashion (bilaterally across the membrane), but instead form numerous lipid raft and raft-like domains as well as non-raft domains displaying discrete compositions and distinguishing features in three dimensions (transversally across the membrane lateral axis) [ 76 ]. For example, caveolin and monosialotetrahexosylganglioside (GM1), both of which are considered elements of lipid raft nanodomains, are not always colocalized[ 77 ]. Highly dynamic, well-organized domains are found both in the exofacial and cytofacial leaflets of the plasma membrane ( Fig. 1 ). In this regard, the plasma membrane is also multifarious in terms of its proteo-lipid bilayer vertical axis. In spite of this diversity, lipid raft and raft-like domains localized across membrane leaflets are not disconnected from one another. Indeed, quite the opposite, i.e., it has been postulated that lipid rafts are coupled in asymmetric lipid bilayers ( Fig. 2 , transbilayer coupling )[ 78 - 81 ]. Interestingly, the formation of inner leaflet domains has been previously shown to be induced by outer leaflet ordered domains in a reconstituted system. For example, both in cellulo and in silico findings provide strong evidence that formation of GPI-anchored protein nanoclusters in the exofacial leaflet is modulated by transbilayer coupling of phosphatidylserine (PS) containing a saturated fatty acyl chain localized in the cytofacial leaflet[ 82 ]. In addition, recent evidence indicates that some raft components, e.g., cholesterol, which has been detected to exist at differing concentrations across plasma membrane leaflets, can be perturbed in a stimulus-specific manner to facilitate signal transduction in ordered domains[ 83 ]. Intraluminal membrane structure and biochemical composition Eukaryotic cells are compartmentalized with intraluminal membranes, forming organelles whose homeostasis and functions are tightly regulated. From an evolutionary standpoint, organelle formation is a prerequisite to achieve high complexity in living beings [ 3 ]. For example, the endosymbiotic theory proposes that organelles with their own genetic material, e.g., mitochondria, appeared in eukaryotic ancestors through the integration of proteobacteria. Studies have demonstrated the structural similarities between mitochondria derived vesicles and prokaryotic outer membranes supporting this theory [ 3 ]. Since we have already described how plasma membrane is organized, we will contrast and compare intracellular membranes in the context of mammalian cells. Endoplasmic reticulum The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is the largest membrane structure in eukaryotic cells, and is formed by a system of membrane sheets and tubes [ 84 ]. Membrane stiffness and thickness play a key role in determining the functions and structures of different organelles, and these two characteristics are homeostatically maintained [ 85 - 87 ]. For example, the ER is endowed with membrane sensory machinery to maintain stiffness and thickness characteristics [ 88 , 89 ]. The ER also has a key role in protein and lipid synthesis which impacts on membrane biogenesis [ 90 , 91 ], regulating most structural lipids such as phospholipids and cholesterol. However, it also synthesizes lipids with non-structural functions, e.g., triglycerides and cholesterol esters [ 92 ]. In the nervous system, ER also produces ceramides to generate minor lipids with signaling functions including diacylglycerol, phosphatidic acid (PA), and lysophospholipids [ 93 ]. The ER also supplies lipids to other organelles with limited or no capacity for lipid synthesis such as Golgi, PM and mitochondria [ 94 - 96 ]. Importantly, Golgi apparatus and PM constitute a cholesterol gradient from ER, which is key to enhancing cholesterol transport to the PM and to maintain secretory pathway directionality [ 97 ]. With respect to lipid composition, unesterified cholesterol in the ER membrane constitutes only 0.5-1% of total cholesterol in the cell, and 3-5% of all ER lipids [ 98 , 99 ]. This homeostasis is achieved by the rapid transference via non vesicular ATP dependent transport of newly synthesized cholesterol to the PM [ 100 ]. Kinetic studies have shown that this process occurs in 10 to 15 min in yeast [ 101 ]. Transport of cholesterol outside the ER is mediated by the arrangement of lipids into membranes. For example, loose lipid packing facilitates the insertion and trafficking of newly synthesized proteins and lipids [ 22 , 102 ]. In terms of homeostasis, increased membrane order can trigger the ER stress pathway though the splicing of XBP1 [ 91 ]. Highly conserved subdomains of the ER, i.e., MAMs, play a central role in the communication between ER and mitochondria ( Fig. 1 ) [ 103 , 104 ]. Structural studies have defined MAMs as detergent resistant lipid rafts, which are in tight contact with mitochondria and have a unique lipid composition similar to PM ordered domains [ 105 ]. Several proteins have been isolated from MAMs suggesting that these domains are involved in several key cellular processes, e.g., protein sorting (PACS-2), inflammation (NACHT, LRR, P4D), ER stress (GRP75, ERp44), mitochondrial transport VDAC), lipid synthesis and trafficking (PSS1, PSS2,), protein folding and mitochondrial morphology [ 106 - 112 ]. In addition, cholesterol is enriched in MAMs compared with the remainder of the ER [ 113 ]. This is noteworthy, because MAMs may play a key role in a number of cellular processes including autophagy, calcium flux and lipid transfer [ 103 , 105 , 113 ]. Similar to MAMs, ordered domains in the ER serve as contact sites with the PM, endosomes, and lipid droplets (LD) [ 105 ]. Mitochondria Mitochondria have an inner and outer membrane with distinct protein topology [ 114 ]. Differences in composition of these membranes are important to control and compartmentalize all functions of the mitochondria [ 115 ]. Similarly, lipid composition is crucial for mitochondrial protein sorting in each organelle compartment and the presence of cardiolipin contributes to its structural characteristics [ 116 , 117 ]. In general, mitochondria depend mostly on ER for lipid transport. For example, while PC, PS, PI, and cholesterol must be imported, mitochondria can synthesize phosphatidylglycerol (PG), cardiolipin, and phosphatidylethanolamine [ 118 - 125 ]. With respect to membrane lipid characteristics, mitochondria exhibit a low phospholipid to protein ratio and low sterol to protein ratio when compared with other intraluminal membranes. Mitochondrial membranes contain high levels of phosphatidylcholine and phosphatidylethanolamine, which constitute approximately 80% of the total phospholipid content. In addition, a uniquely high (up to 25 mol%) cardiolipin content is a signature of mitochondrial membranes [ 116 ]. In steroidogenic tissues, e.g., adrenal glands and gonads, mitochondrial membranes have a higher content of sterols. In these tissues, the first step of steroid hormone synthesis from cholesterol is catalyzed by a side-chain cleavage enzyme P450SCC, localized to the inner mitochondrial membrane [ 126 ]. With respect to other tissues, cells can traffic cholesterol from the cytosol to outer mitochondrial membrane via the activity of the StAR protein family, which have cholesterol binding domains capable of facilitating cholesterol transport [ 127 ]. For example, STARD4 is responsible for cholesterol transport to the outer mitochondrial membrane [ 128 ]. An additional mechanism for lipid transport to mitochondria is mediated by the peripheral benzodiazepine receptor (PBR), located in the outer mitochondrial membrane, which regulates mitochondrial cholesterol import and steroidogenesis [ 129 , 130 ]. Interestingly, some studies suggest STARD4 and PBR interact in a complex including the PBR- associated protein PAP7, PKARI-α and StAR [ 131 ]. Additionally, cholesterol transport to mitochondria can be coordinated with the ER and MAMs as previously described ( Fig. 1 ). There is also some evidence that Tam41 has a dual role as a coordinator of protein translocation/assembly and cardiolipin synthesis, and may therefore regulate the mitochondrial membrane phospholipid to protein ratio [ 132 ]. In comparison, cardiolipin has been shown to partly regulate the stability of the mitochondrial calcium uniporter and mitochondrial DNA in stress conditions, suggesting that the maintenance of lipid composition is crucial for mitochondrial function and homeostasis [ 133 , 134 ]. Nucleus The nuclear envelope (NE) is present in all eukaryotes, representing a clear separation between nucleoplasm and cytoplasm. It also compartmentalizes key processes such as transcription and translation by encasing chromatin. The nuclear envelope is formed by an inner nuclear membrane (INM), outer nuclear membrane (ONM) and the nuclear pore complexes. INM and ONM are separated by a 30-50 nm perinuclear space. Both membranes are unique in their protein composition [ 135 - 138 ]. The ONM is contiguous to the ER and shares features and protein content. The inner nuclear membrane has a distinctive protein expression profile including a filament network, e.g., nuclear lamina [ 139 ]. Besides its barrier function, the nuclear envelope is also involved in diverse cellular functions, e.g., buffering mechanical forces, genome regulation and lipid metabolism [ 137 , 140 - 146 ]. It is not currently known if ER and ONM share the same lipid composition, due to technical challenges to obtain purified nuclear membranes without any ER contamination. However, it is generally believed that lipids can diffuse freely through both membranes to avoid segregation [ 145 ]. From a lipid composition perspective, the nucleus contains glycerophospholipids, sphingolipids and cholesterol. On a mass basis, the total glycerophospholipid content makes up ~3% of the nucleus. Phosphatidylcholine, sphingomyelin, and cholesterol constitute complexes capable of regulating fluidity and signaling pathways in the NE [ 147 ]. Cholesterol, sphingolipids and ceramides are also synthesized on the ER membrane but represent a very low percentage of the lipid composition of the ER and the NE, and these lipids interact with microdomains in the Golgi for posterior modification and transport [ 145 , 148 ]. Interestingly, the lipid composition of the NE can be modified by diet and affect nucleic acid metabolism, suggesting that loss of homoeostasis can be therapeutically manipulated to mitigate nuclear pathogenesis [ 149 - 151 ]. Recent studies have demonstrated the formation of nuclear lipid droplets (nLD) in very diverse tissues and models such as fly fat body cells, mouse fibroblasts, human liver and human prostate cancer cells, suggesting that nLD are more prevalent than initially thought [ 152 - 154 ]. nLD contain neutral lipids similar to cytoplasmic counterparts, but the lipid species and proteins contained within are unique [ 145 , 155 - 157 ]. Recently, it has been shown that nLD biogenesis is regulated by apolipoprotein B (ApoB)-free VLDL precursors in the ER lumen. With respect to homeostasis, lipidated apoB and apoB-free VLDL fuse to generate mature VLDL. When ER stress is triggered, apoB levels decrease, thereby disrupting VLDL secretion leading to the formation of nLD [ 155 ]. Although nLDs and cytosolic LDs might share many properties, it is becoming clear that being located in the nucleus imparts functional uniqueness to nLDs. For example, nLD formation may play an important role in regulating the sterol content of the INM [ 158 ]. Some proteins in the nucleus have been associated with lipid metabolism regulation. One example is the Lamin B receptor (LBR), a protein with homology to sterol C14 reductases which are involved in cholesterol synthesis as demonstrated by the inability of the mutant protein to rescue the cholesterol auxotrophy of LBR deficient cell lines [ 159 - 161 ]. Other important regulatory proteins are lipins, a family of PA phosphatases localized in the cytoplasm and nucleus. They play a central role in lipid metabolism by catalyzing the dephosphorylation of PA to diacylglycerol [ 162 , 163 ]. Additionally, lipins act as transcriptional coactivators of peroxisome proliferator activated receptors (PPARs) to promote fatty acid oxidation in adipocytes, liver and macrophages [ 164 - 167 ]. Cellular cholesterol homeostasis Cholesterol can be obtained by cells through de novo cholesterol synthesis and via dietary intake. The relative contribution of both processes has been estimated to be 70:30 [ 168 ]. However, there is considerable inter-individual variation due to genetic factors and dietary cholesterol consumption. All mammalian cells can synthesize cholesterol from acetyl CoA via the mevalonate pathway. The first sterol formed in this pathway is lanosterol which is processed by several enzymes to form cholesterol. Some intermediate products in the mevalonate pathway can be considered bioactive lipids, although how their accumulation is regulated in cells is poorly understood [ 169 - 171 ]. In contrast, the regulation of cholesterol sensing in the ER by SREBP2 and Scap has been extensively studied. SREBP2 coordinates the transcription of cholesterol homeostasis genes, responding to a decreased cholesterol content in Golgi by proteolytic activation and subsequent transport to the nucleus where it coordinates its target genes [ 172 ]. Sterols inhibit this process through conformational changes in the chaperones SCAP and INSIG [ 173 , 174 ]. The rate limiting step in the mevalonate pathway is the conversion of HMG-CoA to mevalonate by HMG-CoAR. HMG-CoAR and other enzymes catalyzing later steps of the mevalonate pathway are integral ER membrane proteins [ 175 , 176 ]. ER is also the site of cholesterol hydroxylation and fatty acid acylation to form cholesterol esters. Oxysterols are found in very low concentrations and due to their increased solubility, are associated with higher cholesterol efflux [ 102 ]. Sterol esters may accumulate in LD and can be hydrolyzed to form unesterified cholesterol to meet cellular needs [ 177 ]. Intracellular cholesterol transport Cholesterol can be distributed to intracellular membranes by vesicular and non-vesicular pathways [ 102 , 178 ]. Vesicular trafficking uses membrane components carrying their cargo though cytoskeleton fibers, while non vesicular transport is constituted by cytoplasmic cholesterol transfer proteins, and the direct contact between membranes or combinations of both processes [ 179 ][ 180 ]. Several proteins involved in non-vesicular trafficking are members of the steroidogenic acute regulatory protein (STAR) family, such as ceramide transfer protein (CERT), which also binds to ceramides, suggesting a close regulation between both lipid species [ 181 , 182 ]. Oxysterol-binding protein (OSPB) is another protein which exhibits affinity for cholesterol, oxysterols and ceramides [ 183 ]. After exiting the ER, sterols are primarily transported by non-vesicular mechanisms, and are rapidly targeted to the PM where they can be available to external acceptors. In addition, newly synthesized cholesterol can equilibrate with preexisting pools to access intracellular compartments or esterified by acyl- CoA; cholesterol acyltransferase (ACAT) also named sterol o-acyltransferase (SOAT) to reduce unesterified cholesterol levels to avoid lipotoxicity [ 101 , 184 ]. Cholesterol influx and endosomal trafficking In addition to de novo synthesis, cholesterol can be incorporated from lipoproteins in the extracellular space using receptor mediated mechanisms ( Fig. 2 ). The low-density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR) is present in almost all cell types, where it binds apolipoprotein B (apoB) and apolipoprotein E (apoE) rich particles such as chylomicrons, very low-density lipoprotein (VLDL) and low-density lipoprotein (LDL) [ 185 ]. These particles are internalized by clathrin coated vesicles and transported to acidic compartments where cholesterol esters can be hydrolyzed by acid lipase and the resulting unesterified cholesterol used for cellular needs [ 186 , 187 ]. Recycling compartments and internal vesicles contain most of the cholesterol in the endocytic pathway, where approximately 60% is retained in multivesicular endosomes between internal membranes [ 180 ]. Lysosome membranes are normally cholesterol poor to facilitate sphingolipid metabolism, suggesting most of the cholesterol leaves the endosome system before reaching lysosomes [ 180 ]. Multivesicular endosomes are surrounded by Niemann-Pick C1 (NPC1) and Niemann-Pick C2 (NPC2) proteins to move cholesterol and sphingolipids outside the endosomal system to other cell compartments. Their deficiency results in the accumulation of LDL unesterified cholesterol in the endocytic pathway [ 188 ]. After cholesterol is released from the endosomal system, it is delivered to other membranes, including the PM, ER, and mitochondria [ 178 ]. Recent evidence indicates that the last step in the transport of LDL cholesterol from lysosome to PM to ER is governed by GRAM domain-containing 1 (GRAMD1)/Aster and PS [ 189 ]. Cholesterol efflux Elimination of the cholesterol excess helps to prevent its accumulation and is the first step in a process known as Reverse Cholesterol Transport (RCT). RCT has been extensively studied with respect to atherosclerotic plaque formation. Efflux is typically performed by peripheral cells but most of the studies have targeted macrophage-derived foam cells which store cholesterol in cytoplasmic lipid droplets [ 190 ]. The hydrolysis of cholesterol esters activates cholesterol efflux [ 191 ]. The ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporter family are key cholesterol efflux transporters ( Fig. 2 ). ABC transporter A1 (ABCA1) has been extensively studied as a mediator of the first step in high-density lipoprotein (HDL) formation [ 192 ]. ABCA1 is expressed in most tissues, however, hepatic and intestinal expression seem to be the main determinants of HDL levels in mouse [ 193 ]. ABCA1 transfers unesterified cholesterol and phospholipids to lipid poor apolipoprotein A1 (ApoA1), secreted by the liver, to form discoidal HDL particles [ 194 ]. There are several proposed mechanisms to explain how ABCA1 performs lipid transport. Interestingly, caveolae are not preferential to cholesterol efflux PM sites and ABCA1 disrupts ordered domains rich in saturated phosphatidylcholine molecular species where cholesterol binds to ApoA1 [ 194 ]. The ABC transporter G1 (ABCG1) mediates further lipidation of discoidal HDL to promote their maturation in a coordinated activity with ABCA1 [ 195 - 197 ]. Methods to Investigate Membrane Biochemical and Biophysical Properties Due to the complexity and dynamics of plasma membrane ordered domains and the specialized membrane domains of intracellular organelles, e.g., MAMs, various biomimetic membrane models and tools have been utilized to elucidate the determinants influencing their formation, features and dynamics. Remarkably, the tools employed to probe these membrane nanodomains have evolved since the first ordered lipid domain studies were performed in the 1970s due in great part to the controversies in this field. The earliest evidence of the presence of discrete mesoscale compartments in the plasma membrane arose from differential solubilization of these structures using non-ionic detergents[ 198 ]. Dating back previous to this discovery, the interconnecting membrane assemblies shared between the mitochondria and ER were described and, subsequently, their existence corroborated by electron microscopy a decade later[ 199 , 200 ]. Many years later, these findings have allowed scientists to isolate various proteo-lipid membranous regions by ultracentrifugation, revealing the presence of distinctive phase-separating domains exhibiting different lipid-protein compositions. Super resolution microscopy Recently, due to high data variability among several membrane assays, a multitude of techniques have been employed to investigate membrane domains. For example, scientists studying biological membranes have recently utilized super-resolution imaging applications which greatly improve temporal resolution when compared to more conventional microscopy technologies, e.g., confocal microscopy. Analyses performed utilizing stochastic optical reconstruction microscopy (STORM), structured illumination microscopy (SIM), photo-activated localization microscopy (PALM), total internal reflection fluorescence microscopy (TIRFM), stimulated emission depletion (STED), immunoelectron microscopy (immuno-EM), focused ion-beam-scanning EM (FIB-SEM), atomic force microscopy (AFM) and the combination of fluorescence lifetime imaging microscopy and Förster resonance energy transfer (FLIM-FRET) have helped resolve the nanoscale architecture of the plasma membrane, inter-organelle membrane contact sites (MCSs) and membrane protein interactions as well as membrane proteo-lipid composition, sorting/separation and clustering[ 86 - 97 ]. Furthermore, evidence supporting the formation of protein nanoclusters in distinct non-cholesterol-dependent signaling microdomains on the cytofacial leaflet of the plasma membrane has been generated by employing surface fluorescence recovery after photobleaching (FRAP)[ 202 , 213 ]. Other methods such as single-particle tracking (SPT) and fluorescence correlation spectroscopy (FCS) have been utilized to examine the transfer of molecules between organelles at MCSs, nanoscopic spatial regulation of lipids and diffusion of membrane associated molecules over various nanoscale lengths[ 214 - 221 ]. Notably, more recent developments in high-resolution chemical-based imaging techniques, e.g., nanoscale ion mass spectrometry (NanoSIMS), offer relatively higher lipid resolution at the ~ 100-nm level[ 222 - 226 ]. Additionally, time of flight secondary ion mass spectrometry (TOF-SIMS), which is based on event by event impacts of bombarded single clusters of particles, has achieved low nm resolution[ 227 - 233 ]. These techniques improve the ability to detect co-localization of lipids in biological membrane domains, e.g., lipid rafts, in preserved human tissues and other membrane models[ 234 - 236 ]. Finally, electron microscopy (EM) coupled to advanced image analysis software, has facilitated the study of various domain components in the exofacial and cytofacial leaflets of the plasma membrane as well as the examination of domains at inter-organelle MCSs, e.g., MAMs[ 237 - 240 ]. Native mass spectrometry The precise identification and function of the cellular lipidome is essential since the composition of plasma membrane lipids and proteins determine the biochemical and biophysical properties of all cellular membrane domains which, consequently, enable many fundamental cellular signaling processes[ 241 - 243 ]. Determining the chemical identity of cell lipids, proteins and metabolites has proven to be a significant challenge requiring extensive prior knowledge about lipid and protein chemistry; however, utilization of native mass spectrometry allows for the characterization of most lipid classes as well as soluble and membrane proteins [ 243 - 245 ]. Mass spectrometry has been shown to be one of the most accurate tools for probing protein and lipid composition of membranes without the need for external labeling[ 243 ]. Specific ‘omic’ applications, i.e., lipidomics, metabolomics, and proteomics, methodology will be discussed later in this review. OMICS (metabolomics and lipidomics) Due to its high sensitivity and high structural identification capabilities, mass spectrometry has become the method of choice for metabolomic analysis. Metabolomics is the comprehensive analysis of metabolites produced by a biological sample. Metabolomics allows for the detailed characterization of hundreds to thousands of metabolites which define and influence cellular signaling responses[ 246 ]. Facilitated by electrospray ionization mass spectrometry (ESI-MS) lipidomics technology has emerged in the study of lipids in the context of biological samples[ 247 ]. Lipids are becoming increasingly recognized as the central metabolites affecting cellular signaling processes[ 248 ]. ESI-MS allows for the structural determination and quantitative analysis of lipid molecular species from cellular lipidomes[ 247 ]. A lipidome is a complete set of lipid species that exist within a cell which can vary depending on temporal events and any perturbations the cell may have experienced [ 249 ]. Lipidomics can aid in the identification and quantification of specific lipid species which may influence plasma membrane biophysical properties. Furthermore, due to cell heterogeneity, single-cell lipidomics approaches are being developed to reveal detailed lipidome composition in single cells which is lost in bulk cell analyses[ 250 ]. Membrane lipid raft-targeting drugs Lipid-driven membrane organization is essential for normal cellular physiological function. Thus, the investigation of lipid raft domains is paramount in order to better understand cellular membrane-associated signaling. Lipid rafts and raft-like domains serve as the intersection where many crucial signaling events occur, including the clustering of protein-protein and protein-lipid complexes and the recruitment of downstream signaling effectors[ 39 , 82 , 251 , 252 ]. Alteration of lipid rafts by modulation of its components provide critical mechanistic details regarding the precise function of specific membrane proteins and lipids. Therapeutic agents which affect membrane composition and organization have led to the development of membrane-lipid therapy which involves utilizing drugs capable of modifying membrane lipid structures as a novel clinical treatment approach[ 253 , 254 ]. For example, the lipid raft-disrupting alkylphospholipid drug, miltefosine, has been shown to preferentially suppress cancer stem cell proliferation[ 255 ]. Additionally, lipid rafts can be disrupted by i) reducing cholesterol biosynthesis with the use of statins, bisphosphonates, or zaragozic acid, ii) cholesterol sequestration by pore formation via amphotericin, filipin, or nystatin, iii) cholesterol depletion by extraction via cyclodextrins[ 242 , 256 ], and iv) inhibition of membrane saturated acyl chain lipid packing by oxysterols[ 257 , 258 ]. Other constituents of lipids rafts can also be targeted such as depletion of sphingolipids via fumonisins or myriocin, and the depletion of sphingomyelin by sphingomyelinase[ 242 ]. These tools allow researchers to manipulate lipid raft organization, composition and function, thus allowing their examination in a variety of biological contexts. Protein sorting and detergents The plasma membrane consists of a mixture of lipids, membrane proteins, and membrane-anchored proteins. Components of the plasma membrane, such as lipid rafts, have been hypothesized to function by compartmentalizing the functional components, i.e., specific lipids, proteins, and their downstream effectors, also known as protein sorting[ 259 , 260 ]. Precise distribution and sorting of membrane proteins to distinct locations on the plasma membrane increases the likelihood of efficient and robust downstream signaling[ 259 , 260 ]. Cholesterol-induced changes to plasma membrane composition allows for effective and accurate protein partitioning between different membrane domains in part by altering bilayer thickness[ 261 ]. Characterization of these membrane protein sorted pools has provided novel mechanistic insight into signaling propagation and shed light on potential new therapeutic targets[ 262 , 263 ]. The initial evidence for a heterogenous plasma membrane model arose from observations of different solubilization fractions of membrane lipids by detergents[ 198 ]. Non-ionic detergents can be utilized to separate cellular membranes into distinct fractions containing detergent-soluble membrane (DSMs) or detergent-resistant membrane (DRMs). Each fraction contains distinct compositions with the DRMs enriched in cholesterol, sphingolipids, and glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI)-anchored proteins[ 264 - 266 ]. Although detergent assays provide evidence regarding the propensity of lipids and proteins to associate with specific lipids, variations in detergent chemical composition, the concentration of the detergent and the temperature during fractionation can lead to inconsistent results[ 267 , 268 ]. Therefore, detergent-dependent assays should serve as a starting point prior to the use of more robust confirmation of protein or lipid localization. Nonetheless, these assays coupled with rigorous sample handling and other protocols, e.g., electrophoresis, can enable simple and effective analysis of cellular membrane composition[ 269 ]. Membrane lipid packing/order Fluorescence imaging using environment sensitive fluorescent probes has been widely used to quantitatively measure membrane lipid packing/order[ 270 ]. In general, fluorophores are sensitive to membrane polarity and exhibit spectral shifts with polarity changes. Due to the spectral shifting between membrane ordered and disordered phases, ratiometric imaging is employed for analyzing and quantifying membrane fluidity. Typically, the rigidity of membranes is characterized using a relative generalized polarization (GP) index[ 271 , 272 ]. GP is defined as a modified ratiometric calculation using fluorescence intensities from the ordered channel ( I o ) and disordered channel ( I d ): GP = ( I o − I d )/( I o + I d ). Laurdan[ 273 ] and Di-4-ANEPPDHQ (Di-4)[ 274 ] are two commonly employed fluorophores, among various environment sensitive probes, for the examination of membrane order[ 275 ]. Laurdan and its more photostable derivative C-Laurdan (CL)[ 276 ] exhibit ~50 nm blue shifts in their emission spectra from liquid-disordered phase to liquid-ordered phase following excitation at ~400 nm. This excitation wavelength is well suited for multi-photon microscopy (generally ~800 nm excitation)[ 271 , 272 , 276 ]. Due to the deeper penetration depth and relatively lower phototoxicity and photobleaching of multi-photon imaging, Laurdan and CL have been widely used for imaging artificial membranes[ 276 ], giant plasma membrane vesicles (GPMVs)[ 277 ], whole cells[ 278 ] and tissues[ 278 , 279 ]. Another popular fluorescent probe employed for the rigorous examination of membrane order is Di-4, a fast-response dye that operates by means of a change in its electronic structure in response to a change in its surrounding electric field at the membrane. This probe exhibits a 488 nm excitation and ~60 nm spectral shift between ordered and disordered phases [ 280 ]. This makes it ideal for conventional microscopy imaging, such as confocal microscopy[ 278 ], total internal reflection microscopy[ 281 ] and flow cytometry[ 282 ]. Notably, Di-4 has been successfully utilized to investigate a variety of membrane order-chronic diseases[ 280 , 283 - 286 ]. Recently, a new series of salvatochromic fluorophores for lipid order measurements have been developed, including Laurdan-modified probe Pro12A[ 287 ] and Nile Red-based probes, e.g., NR12S, NR12A, NR Mito [ 288 , 289 ]. These newly developed probes are designed to target select cellular organelles with increased binding affinities and specificity, such as Pro12A and NR12S for plasma membrane, and NR Mito and NR ER for mitochondria and endoplasmic reticulum, respectively. These exciting developments have enabled the measurement of membrane fluidity in different intracellular compartments in live cells. It is also noteworthy that NR4A, with reversible binding properties, can be exploited as a plasma membrane targeting probe for super-resolution microscopy (STED) related applications[ 290 , 291 ]. With the development of imaging flow cytometry (IFC)[ 292 , 293 ], there is a demand to further optimize methodologies for measuring membrane order. IFC is a high-throughput instrumentation with single cell resolution, which combines the advantages of microscopy and flow cytometry. Using this format, multichannel images of thousands of cells can be collected within minutes. With the development of machine learning/deep learning algorithms, data analyses are typically faster and more robust. Notably, our group has successfully employed IFC to measure membrane rigidity in dissociated single cells and GPMVs using Di-4[ 285 , 286 , 294 ] . Undoubtedly, due to the great interest and applicability of these technologies, there will be additional fluorophores utilized for IFC in the future. Fluorescence lifetime imaging microscopy (FLIM) is also commonly used to measure membrane order. For example, Laurdan and Di-4 have been applied to FLIM-based membrane order analysis[ 295 ]. There have been assorted fluorophores published for membrane lipid order measurement using FLIM[ 296 - 299 ]. For example, “Flipper probes” are a newly developed class of fluorescent probes to image membrane tension in living cells[ 300 , 301 ]. The lifetimes of these flipper probes change with membrane tension, which makes them suitable for FLIM measurement. A variety of flipper dyes are designed for selectively imaging specific intracellular organelles, such as the plasma membrane, endoplasmic reticulum, mitochondria, lysosome, and early endosome[ 302 , 303 ]. In addition to the fluorescence imaging-based methods mentioned above, there are label-free techniques available for measuring membrane order, such as atomic force microscopy (AFM) and nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy (NMR). Since AFM can provide single-molecule level analysis with nanometer resolution and is typically performed in liquids such as physiological buffers, it has been utilized for multiple cell membrane-related applications[ 304 - 307 ]. For example, AFM was utilized to measure cell membrane stiffness in vitro following exposure to saturated versus omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acid (PUFAs)[ 308 ]. Interestingly, this approach generated similar findings in comparison to Di-4 [ 286 ]. NMR is also used for lipid order measurements. A linear relationship between lipid acyl chain order measured by NMR and GP value from the fluorescent probe Laurdan has been reported[ 309 ]. Collectively, all the techniques discussed herein can serve as complementary methods to reveal the intricacies of cellular membrane domain structure, organization and function. Plasma and Intracellular Membrane Signaling As noted above, free cholesterol undergoes a complex process of trafficking and interconversion to its metabolites. Several regulatory steps control its abundance affecting plasma and intraluminal membrane structure and cell signaling events. We will describe below some examples of cancer-related biochemical and biophysical phenotypes mediated in part by cholesterol dyshomeostasis. As mentioned herein, plasma membrane lipid rafts, raft-like and non-raft domains serve as fulcrums that modulate cellular signaling pathways[ 237 - 240 ]. These membrane assemblies engage signaling molecules from the extracellular space, amplify their inherent encoded messages, multiplex these messages with other cellular signals and channel transmission to various intracellular pathways in a two- or three-dimensional fashion. Therefore, we will focus on membrane signaling from lipid raft and raft-like domains in this section due to their relevance to malignant processes in cancer[ 310 , 311 ]. As described by a plethora of findings, raft and raft-like proteolipid domains coexist in the lipid bilayer as a heterogeneous multitude of protein, lipid and their-modified counterparts forming complex assemblies of varying compositions ( Fig. 1 )[ 310 , 311 ]. The structure, organization and function of these signaling platforms are particularly dependent on the partitioning of its membranous components into distinct regions, which in turn is driven by the cell cytoskeleton, and the oligomerization of proteins and lipids into membrane-associated macromolecular complexes also known as signaling clusters ( Fig. 2 , clustering )[ 312 ]. Most of the existing evidence describing raft and raft-like domains indicates that these membrane assemblies are highly dynamic, displaying short lifetimes (1 ns to 1 s) which are stabilized and enlarged by way of the clustering of proteins and lipids following ligand-directed cell receptor stimuli[ 313 - 315 ]. Several molecular pathways heavily rely on the precise arrangement of their receptors and effectors into distinct platforms or signaling “hubs” at defined cellular membrane sites in order to efficiently modulate the various fundamental processes necessary to sustain cellular function. Wnt signaling pathway The formation of well-defined membrane domains exhibiting multifarious biophysical and compositional characteristics has been linked to numerous signal transduction pathways ( Figs. 3 - 5 ). For example, the canonical Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway ( Fig. 3 ) governs a myriad of biological processes underlying embryogenesis, adult stem cell renewal, proliferation, differentiation, apoptosis and in some contexts, tumorigenesis[ 316 - 319 ]. From a mechanistic perspective, chronic upregulation of interactions between lipid-modified Wnt ligands and the integral plasma membrane receptors, low density lipoprotein receptor-related proteins 5/6 (LRP5/6) and Frizzled (Fzd) promotes cancer[ 320 ]. Figure 3. The role of membrane domains in signaling pathways associated with cancer. Open in a new tab A) Wnt signaling pathway . In the “off’ state, Wnt signaling receptors, i.e., LRP6 and Frizzled (Fzd), localize into both raft (ordered) and non-raft (disordered) domains. In the presence of Wnt ligands (“on” state), cholesterol bilayer asymmetry is triggered, which leads to enrichment of cholesterol in the cytofacial leaflet. Moreover, Wnt-Fzd-LRP6 complexes preferably localize to cholesterol-enriched membrane domains containing caveolin. This, in turn, leads to the recruitment of the Wnt signaling effector Dvl into Wnt-associated clusters. The ability of Dvl to oligomerize stimulates Fzd and LRP6 clustering and the recruitment of Axin to Wnt signalosomes, leading to LRP6 phosphorylation by Wnt-associated kinases, i.e., GSK3 and CK1, in ordered domains. Simultaneously, lipid kinases, e.g., PI4KII and PIP5KI (not shown), are recruited to rafts and promote the production of PIP 2 , which in turn promotes LRP6 and Fzd clustering and phosphorylation. Notably, although active Wnt-LRP6-Fzd complexes can localize to non-raft domains, Lypd6, a GPI-anchored protein that localizes specifically in lipid rafts, guarantees that LRP6 phosphorylation and thus receptor activation and efficient signaling occur in ordered domains in order to enable downstream signaling. B) EGFR/KRas signaling pathway . In the “off” state, EGFR preferably localizes into non-raft domains. In the presence of EGF (“on” state), EGFR signaling is initiated from highly organized nanoscale proteolipid domains, driven by the precise production of specific lipids. For example, EGFR activation by EGF initiates the formation of lipid domains enriched in PIP 2 and PA. PA generated by PLD2 acts as a beacon to recruit KRas and SOS1, and along with PIP 2 , acts as a cofactor for SOS1-mediated activation of KRas. Furthermore, this pool of PA stabilizes the actin cytoskeleton, of which KRas nanoclustering is dependent. Together, these steps contribute to efficient ERK activation and downstream signaling. LRP6, LDL receptor related protein 6; Fzd, frizzled; Dvl, dishevelled; GSK3, glycogen synthase kinase 3; CK1, casein kinase 1; EGFR, epidermal growth factor receptor; EGF, epidermal growth factor; PLD2, phospholipase D2; KRas, kirsten rat sarcoma virus proto-oncogene; SOS1, SOS Ras/Rac guanine nucleotide exchange factor 1; ERK, extracellular regulated MAP kinase. Figure 5. The role of membrane domains and their downstream signaling components in cancer. Open in a new tab The role of rafts in the TCR pathway . TCRα/TCRβ and TCRγ/TCRδ heterodimers form complexes with the CD3/CD8 molecules. The variable region of TCR heterodimers recognize the antigen peptide-loaded on MHC (pMHC). In the absence of pMHC, the cytoplasmic domains of the CD3 molecules form a closed conformation, which is inaccessible to kinases for phosphorylation. At steady state, active Lck, Lat and a fraction of the TCR (not shown) are associated with lipid rafts. The domains of the CD3 cytosolic chains on TCR/CD3 are unphosphorylated as they are not accessible to Lck due to the confinement of TCR/CD3 and Lck in distinct membrane domains; CD3 cytosolic domains are not exposed (closed conformation). Upon TCR activation, raft domains rearrange, TCR/CD3 and active Lck form clusters and the CD3 domains change their conformation (open conformation). Subsequently, Lck phosphorylates tyrosine residues within TCR/CD3 and the phosphorylated regions become docking sites for the tandem SH2 domains of the tyrosine kinase ZAP-70, which is subsequently activated by autophosphorylation and by Lck-mediated phosphorylation. (1) Activated ZAP-70 phosphorylates the transmembrane adapter Lat, which in turn interacts and activates PLCγ1. (2) As a result, PIP 2 synthesis is triggered, which leads to an increase in its levels at the cytofacial leaflet and, simultaneously, (3) CD28 activation leads to the phosphorylation of its cytoplasmic tail and the subsequent recruitment of PI3K as well as the reorganization of the cell cytoskeleton (not shown). (4) Furthermore, TCR/CD3/pMHC and CD28/PI3K signaling pathways can independently activate PKC-θ for the downstream activation and nuclear translocation of NF-κB, and (5) includes the activation of multiple types of cytokines, e.g., IL-1 and TNF-α molecules. Cytokine-mediated programmed cell death or apoptosis is triggered via JAK1/STAT3/caspase-7–dependent pathway. PD-1/PD-L1 signaling . (6) TCR signal activation stimulates the expression of PD-1. Consequently, (7) PD-1 directly antagonizes TCR signaling by recruiting phosphatases to its immunoreceptor tyrosine-based inhibitory motif (ITIM) and immunoreceptor tyrosine-based switch motif (ITSM) domains on the PD-1 tail. This consequently prevents Lck-mediated phosphorylation of ZAP70. PD-1 can also inhibit CD28-induced activation of PI3K (not shown). In comparison, (8) PD-L1 expressed on tumor cells interacts with PD-1 triggers inhibitory signals in T cells. PD-L1 can also deliver inhibitory signals to tumor cells to attenuate STAT3/caspase-7–dependent cytotoxicity. Stimulation of LRP5/6 and Fzd by Wnt at the plasma membrane, which involves receptor reorganization, phosphorylation and endocytosis, results in the stabilization, translocation, and accumulation of β-catenin in the nucleus. Once in the nucleus, β-catenin acts as a transcriptional co-activator, and along with lymphoid enhancer-binding factor (Lef) and T cell factor (Tcf) family, initiates transcription of various β-catenin related genes. In recent years, it has become evident that the plasma membrane receptors as well as other membrane proteolipid components of the Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway ( Fig. 3 ) arrange into specialized nanocluster membrane domains to undergo signal transduction[ 35 , 321 ]. The Wnt/β-catenin membrane nanoclusters encompass LRP5/6 and Fzd, as the main players, as well as the cytosolic proteins Dishevelled (Dvl) and Axin. Notably, these proteins localize into ordered membrane domains and arrange to form active clusters, i.e., Wnt signalosomes. Wnt/β-catenin-associated clusters have been reported to be &lt; 100 nm in size when Wnt ligands are absent[ 20 ]. However, the presence of Wnt proteins can induce a re-localization of Wnt/β-catenin membrane components, which leads to a significant increase in the size of nanoclusters. Specifically, in the presence of Wnt3a, relatively large nanoclusters (&gt; 200 nm) containing LRP6 have been observed. More recently, multiple studies have shown that select proteins, lipids and carbohydrates appear to be required to form Wnt/β-catenin signaling-associated nanoclusters[ 20 , 322 - 324 ]. Another important component associated with the Wnt/β-catenin signaling is the positive feedback regulator, Ly6 family protein LY6/PLAUR domain-containing 6 (Lypd6). Notably, in lipid rafts, Lypd6 facilitates LRP6 phosphorylation, activation and condensation into ~100 nm protein clusters [ 325 , 326 ]. Intriguingly, GPI-anchored resident proteins like Lypd6 have been shown to induce recruitment of kinases at the cytofacial leaflet of the plasma membrane[ 327 - 329 ]. Furthermore, Wnt/β-catenin pathway-associated casein kinase 1 gamma (Ck1 γ ), a kinase that phosphorylates LRP6, is enriched in lipid raft domains[ 330 , 331 ]. Consequently, Lypd6 nanoclustering appears to serve a key modulatory role during the recruitment of Ck1 γ and other Wnt-associated kinases to active Wnt/β-catenin nanoclusters in lipid rafts. Likewise, other plasma membrane components such as heparin sulfate (HepS), cholesterol, and phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate (PIP 2 ) have been shown to modulate Wnt/β-catenin pathway-associated nanocluster formation and stabilization. Using STED microscopy, it has been shown that two types of HepS polysaccharides, “N-sulfo-rich HepS” (N-sulfo HepS) and “N-acetyl-rich HepS” (N-acetyl HepS) form nanoclusters (~200 nm) [ 322 ]. Interestingly, N-sulfo HepS, not N-acetyl-HepS, preferentially colocalizes with Wnt/β-catenin membrane receptors, i.e., Fzd and LRP5/6 as well as LRP5/6’s membrane active form, phosphorylated LRP5/6 (pLRP5/6)[ 322 ]. Interestingly, N-sulfo HS membrane clusters have been shown to contain Wnt ligands and have been hypothesized to serve as pre-existing assembly sites for Wnt/β-catenin pathway-associated nanocluster formation[ 332 ]. Finally, PIP 2 , whose synthesis during Wnt/β-catenin-associated signaling is triggered by Wnt ligand stimulation, has been described to be required for LRP6 oligomerization as well as recruitment of Axin and other effector proteins to the membrane cytofacial leaflet[ 332 , 333 ]. Altogether, there is compelling evidence supporting the notion that multiple membrane components such as proteins, lipids, carbohydrates and even the membrane cytoskeleton directly and strongly modulate, in a highly dynamic yet precise manner, the structure and function of the lipid bilayer to orchestrate key Wnt signaling events at specific membrane domains. In turn, these well-defined and highly distinct membrane domains precisely coordinate many of the fundamental signaling events in live cells. With respect to the Wnt/β-catenin-associated membrane ordered domains, Wnt ligand-dependent signal transduction is believed to initiate from lipid rafts[ 334 ]. Interestingly, Wnt signaling has been shown to be modulated by several molecules that reside in raft domains ( Fig. 3 ). For example, one of the central molecules found in stable lipid raft subdomains of caveolae, i.e., caveolin, is involved in the endocytic uptake of active Wnt receptors and the stabilization of β-catenin[ 335 ]. The specific arrangement of LRP5/6 and Fzd into raft domains is also required for the activation of downstream Wnt/β-catenin effectors. For example, Dickkopf 1 (Dkk1), an antagonist of Wnt signaling, inhibits the Wnt/β-catenin pathway by reducing the levels of LRP5/6 receptors in plasma membrane lipid raft domains. This is attributed to the ability of Dkk1 to regulate distinct internalization pathways of LRP6, which suppresses its phosphorylation [ 330 , 331 ]. Interestingly, receptor phosphorylation and endocytic uptake, which are both required for downstream stabilization of β-catenin, can take place independently of each other. The latter finding supports the notion that both receptor phosphorylation and endocytic uptake are important modulators of Wnt/β-catenin signaling. Additional lipid raft components have been described to modulate the Wnt/β-catenin pathway. Cogent evidence indicates that cholesterol, a lipid best known for its intrinsic biophysical membrane properties, selectively enhances canonical Wnt signaling over non-canonical Wnt signaling[ 336 ]. More precisely, cholesterol enables the association between Disheveled (Dvl), a scaffold cytosolic protein associated with the Wnt/β-catenin pathway, LRP5/6, Axin and the anionic phospholipid, PIP 2 . Furthermore, binding of Wnt ligand to Fzd and LRP5/6 has been shown to promote unesterified cholesterol and activated receptor colocalization. The latter is believed to be achieved by relocating Fzd to cholesterol-enriched membrane domains containing LRP6. This is noteworthy, because canonical models suggest that raft domain composition is altered following ligand binding, e.g., Wnt stimulation. Other protein effectors that directly regulate Wnt signaling have also been shown to accumulate in lipid raft domains. For example, Lypd6 directly interacts with the LRP5/6, thus promoting LRP5/6 phosphorylation in raft domains. Interestingly, reorganization of Lypd6 molecules into non-raft domains is sufficient to reduce LRP5/6 phosphorylation and suppress downstream signaling[ 326 ]. Lastly, lipid rafts and their components have been shown to modulate the Wnt/β-catenin pathway by facilitating plasma membrane lipid asymmetry. Quantitative live-cell imaging studies have revealed a significant correlation between plasma membrane cytofacial leaflet cholesterol levels and activation of the Wnt/β-catenin pathway[ 83 ]. This supports the notion that cholesterol can also serve as a signaling lipid and that its ligand-dependent redistribution in the lipid bilayer regulates the Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway. KRas signaling pathway Ras-mediated signaling also involves nanoscale proteolipid-based activation, recruitment, and signaling ( Fig. 3 ). Ras proteins are membrane-bound small GTPases which toggle between GDP-bound (inactive) and GTP-bound (active) states. When in the GTP-bound state, Ras activates various downstream effector pathways responsible for cell cycle progression and cell survival[ 337 ]. Among major cancer types, approximately 19% of cancer patients harbor a Ras mutation[ 338 ]. Ras gene mutations often result in Ras remaining fixed in the active GTP-bound state thereby hyperactivating downstream signaling pathways, resulting in tumor initiation[ 339 ]. Ras activity is dependent on its localization to the cytofacial leaflet of the plasma membrane[ 340 ], where Ras proteins can laterally diffuse as monomers and dimers which assemble into higher order oligomers and nanoclusters[ 39 , 341 - 343 ]. These Ras nanoclusters are essential platforms for effector recruitment, binding, and signal transduction[ 39 , 41 , 344 ]. Additionally, upstream EGFR nanocluster formation has been shown to influence the efficiency of downstream signal propagation[ 37 , 38 , 345 ]. Mammalian cells express three related Ras proteins, HRas, KRas, and NRas, and although the three isoforms exhibit a high degree of sequence similarity, KRas mutations are far more frequently observed in cancer, accounting for 75% of all Ras mutations [ 337 - 339 ]. KRas plasma membrane localization and spatial distribution are determined by its plasma membrane anchor [ 346 , 347 ]. Specifically, the KRas plasma membrane anchor consists of two components: a C-terminal S-farnesyl cysteine carboxylmethyl ester, which is common to all Ras isoforms, and a lysine-rich polybasic domain [ 346 , 347 ]. This KRas plasma membrane anchor determines the exquisite specificity of KRas to highly selected plasma membrane anionic phospholipids such as monovalent PS and PA[ 348 , 349 ]. In comparison, GDP-bound and GTP-bound KRas form nanoclusters in a cholesterol-independent manner ( Fig. 3 ) [ 39 , 202 , 343 ]. Similarly, other lipids, such as negatively-charged PA, distribute differently in certain types of Ras clusters[ 343 , 349 , 350 ]. Furthermore, utilizing multiple approaches to block KRas interactions with the plasma membrane is now considered a tractable strategy to inhibit oncogenic KRas activity[ 351 ]. Interestingly, the formation of inactive HRas and active KRas nanoclusters is regulated by the actin cytoskeleton, whereas active HRas shows no such dependency[ 39 ]. In many instances, formation of KRas nanoclusters is intertwined with ERK signaling ( Fig. 3 ) [ 41 ]. This notion is consistent with the fact that actin disruption modulates oncogenic active GTP-bound KRasG12V but not HRasG12V signaling [ 39 ]. EGFR/MAPK/ERK signaling The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is a receptor tyrosine kinase which plays a critical role in cell proliferation, migration, differentiation, and apoptosis[ 352 , 353 ]. EGFR signaling is initiated by the binding of ligands such as epidermal growth factor (EGF) which upon binding, induces and stabilizes homodimerization of the EGFR, autophosphorylation, and recruitment of signaling adaptors and downstream effectors such as Ras ( Fig. 3 ) [ 354 ]. In specific cancers, EGFR expression and activity is upregulated due to overexpression, mutations or truncations[ 353 , 355 ]. It is noteworthy that many membrane receptor proteins involved in cancer cell signaling, including transmembrane receptors and G proteins, localize to lipid rafts[ 356 ] and nanocluster[ 37 ]. For example, the EGFR requires lipid raft localization and nanoclustering for efficient signaling[ 37 , 357 , 358 ]. Displacement of EGFR from lipid rafts, via a reduction in lipid raft cholesterol composition, leads to an altered phosphorylated state and suppression of downstream signaling, e.g., canonical Ras/Raf/MEK(MAPK)/ERK pathway[ 359 - 361 ]. Mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) cascades are essential and evolutionarily conserved signaling pathways involved in the regulation of cell proliferation, migration, apoptosis and differentiation [ 362 ]. In mammals, the following six distinct groups of MAPKs have been characterized: extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK)1/2, ERK3/4, ERK5, ERK7/8, Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK)1/2/3 and the p38 isoforms α/β/γ(ERK6)/δ[ 363 - 366 ]. The ERK1/2 pathway is the best studied pathway and is dysregulated in approximately a third of all human cancers due to hyperactivation of signaling components upstream[ 367 , 368 ]. Upon activation via phosphorylation, ERK1 (p44) and ERK2 (p42) translocate to the nucleus and activate a variety of transcriptional factors involved in cell proliferation[ 368 ] which can exacerbate tumorigenesis[ 367 ]. Blocking cell surface EGFR, via cetuximab binding, diminishes downstream ERK1/2 activity[ 369 ], further demonstrating that exclusion or mislocalization of plasma membrane associated receptors, such as the EGFR and their downstream effectors, e.g., Ras, may serve as a therapeutic strategy. P53 effects on plasma and intraluminal membrane signaling P53 is defined as a key homotetrameric transcription factor with the ability to regulate multiple cellular processes ( Fig. 4 ) [ 370 - 374 ]. It exerts its functions through the transcriptional activation of approximately 200 genes such as p21 and p27 (to induce cell-cycle arrest), PAI1 (regulation of senescence), PUMA, BAX and NOXA (induction of apoptosis) and TIGAR and GLS2 (metabolic reprograming)[ 375 - 383 ]. Under normal steady-state conditions, p53 is expressed at low levels due to its proteasomal degradation by the ring-finger type E3 ubiquitin protein ligase MDM2[ 384 , 385 ]. DNA damage typically induces nuclear accumulation of wild type p53 through post-translational phosphorylation and acetylation-dependent mechanisms. These modifications induce p53 activation presumably by inducing its dissociation with MDM2[ 386 , 387 ]. Once p53 accumulates in the nucleus, it can activate its target genes[ 388 - 392 ]. Mutant p53 can escape proteasomal degradation leading to abnormal accumulation[ 393 ]. Interestingly, while p53 activity has been canonically presented as dependent on its translocation to the nucleus, it can also induce changes in membrane phospholipid composition via the enrichment of unsaturated and monounsaturated acyl chains[ 394 ]. This phenotype is associated with the downregulation of stearoyl-CoA desaturase 1 (SCD) by the repression of the sterol regulatory element binding protein-1c (SREBP1c). p53 can also regulate the transcription of phosphate and tensin homolog deleted on chromosome 10 (PTEN), a dual phosphatase and tumor suppressor[ 395 ]. This is noteworthy, because PTEN has been linked to the modulation of polyphosphoinositides localized to the PM[ 396 ]. Figure 4. Cholesterol-dependent signaling pathways associated with cancer. Open in a new tab A) p53 signaling pathway . (1) When DNA damage occurs in a healthy cellular state, p53 interaction with E3 Ubiquitin-Protein Ligase Mdm2 (MDM2) is suppressed, and (2) subsequently accumulates in the nucleus, thereby (3) promoting gene expression. Depending on the extent of DNA damage, (4) p53 can induce the expression of p21 resulting in (5) cell cycle arrest or (6) cell apoptosis by coordinating protein activity in mitochondria. In a cancerous cellular state, (7) mutant p53 (mp53) proteins can acquire new gain of function (GOF) oncogenic properties. (8) Mutant p53 can bind to the promoter of SREBP and (9) increase the expression of its targets, thereby upregulating mevalonate pathway-related genes and de novo cholesterol synthesis leading (10) to the subsequent accumulation of cholesterol in transformed cells. B) Hippo signaling pathway . The Aster B/C protein (11) binds and (12) transports PM cholesterol to the ER by via a non-vesicular mechanism. Once in the ER, (13) cholesterol triggers the activity of soluble adenylate cyclase (sAC) which (14) produces cyclic AMP to (15) activate protein kinase A (PKA). Upon PKA activation, (16) inositol phosphate receptor (IP3R1) is phosphorylated and mediates the release of calcium. (17) Calcium activates the small GTPase, RhoA. (18) RhoA can act as an effective inhibitor of the Hippo pathway kinases LATS 1 and 2. In its active form, (19) LATS1/2 phosphorylates TAZ and (20) induces its proteasomal degradation. In contrast, inactivation of LATS1/2 prevents phosphorylation and degradation of TAZ, which consequently (21) leads to its translocation into the nucleus. Once inside the nucleus, (22) TAZ binds transcription factor TEAD1 and promotes gene expression. Bcl-2 inhibits apoptosis by interfering with pro-apoptotic homologues and by suppressing the release of cytochrome c from mitochondria[ 397 - 401 ]. From a membrane perspective, the inhibition of p53 transcriptional activity by Bcl-2 requires its membrane-anchoring domain[ 402 ]. Recent evidence suggests that the Bcl-2 transmembrane C terminal domain mediates Bcl-2 - p53 antagonism by regulating Bcl-2 attachment to endomembranes[ 403 ]. T cell receptor signaling Another bona fide membrane protein receptor, whose signaling is directly associated with its organization in lipid raft domains and requires nanoclustering to signal is the T cell receptor (TCR) ( Fig. 5 ). T cells are specialized lymphocytes associated with adaptive immunity and play a central role in coordinating cell-mediated immune responses to protect the host against infections and cancer[ 404 ]. TCRs are located at the plasma membrane, where they recognize antigenic foreign- or self-peptides bound to the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) of antigen-presenting cells [ 404 , 405 ]. TCR signaling is highly specific and extremely sensitive and it has previously been shown that a single antigenic peptide-MHC ligand is sufficient to trigger TCR activation[ 406 - 408 ]. Along with the α/β heterodimer TCR complex, the multi-subunit CD3 complex comprises CD3εγ, CD3εδ, and CD3ζζ dimers[ 409 ]. The CD3 immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motifs (ITAMs) are phosphorylated upon TCR-antigen engagement by Lck nonreceptor tyrosine kinase[ 410 , 411 ]. Phosphorylation of ITAM is required for the recruitment and phosphorylation of Zap70 protein kinase and the adaptor linker for activation of T cells, Lat[ 412 ]. Phosphorylation of the TCR-CD3 complex is one of the earliest biochemical events in T cell signaling and mediates downstream activation responses[ 413 ]. There is increasing evidence that the TCR and TCR-CD3 complexes rearrange into nano- to micrometer sized clusters to regulate T cell activation[ 410 , 414 ]. Super-resolution fluorescence microscopy has revealed that upon activation, at least a proportion of TCRs organize into small clusters 30-300 nm in diameter in the PM[ 415 , 416 ]. Furthermore, downstream effectors such as Lck[ 417 ], Lat[ 415 , 416 , 418 ], and Zap70[ 416 , 419 ] also reorganize and nanocluster during T cell activation. Plasma membrane lipid composition of the immunological synapse varies from the lipid composition of other membrane regions[ 257 , 420 ]. Moreover, lipidomic studies have demonstrated that cholesterol, sphingomyelin, and saturated phosphocholine species are enriched at TCR-CD3 complexes[ 421 ]. Altering the composition of the plasma membrane by increasing cholesterol levels enhances immunological synapse maturation[ 422 ]. A biophysical hallmark of cholesterol-enriched lipids rafts is the high degree of membrane order which can be inferred by the utilization of polarity-sensitive membrane dyes[ 278 ]. Furthermore, T cells exhibiting high membrane order form more stable immune synapses and are capable of proliferating more robustly compared to T cells with lower membrane order which demonstrate unstable immune synapses and reduced proliferation[ 282 ]. Additionally, only TCR-CD3 complexes located in dense clusters are typically phosphorylated indicating that the receptor density within clusters driven by the lipid composition and organization of the plasma membrane dictates signal initiation ( Fig. 5 )[ 405 ]. Disruption of lipid rafts by cholesterol- or sphingomyelin-depletion has been shown to impair TCR signaling[ 423 , 424 ]. Recent studies suggest that manipulating membrane lipid profiles may restore T-cell function in the context of autoimmunity[ 425 ] and cancer immunotherapy[ 426 , 427 ]. PD-1/PD-L1 signaling pathway The recent success of programmed cell death protein 1 (PD-1) and its programmed cell death ligand (PD-L1) as a target in cancer immune therapy highlights the important role of the PD-1/PD-L1 pathway in the regulation of antitumor responses. Interestingly, this pathway exhibits and shares, with other pathways described in this review, many of the fundamental organizational features and functionalities required for efficient membrane signaling ( Fig. 5 ). PD-L1 is a transmembrane protein which acts as a co-inhibitory checkpoint factor of the immune response by binding to the PD-1 receptor located on T cells. The PD-1/PD-L1 axis inhibits T cell activation, proliferation, survival, and cytokine secretion [ 428 ] leading to T cell dysfunction, i.e., T cell exhaustion, and cancer immuno-evasion [ 429 ]. Recently, in addition to promoting cancer cell evasion from immune cells, PD-L1 promotes cancer cell maintenance and expansion by forming a positive feedback loop leading to the upregulation of PD-L1 and hyperactivation of signaling pathways such as Wnt[ 430 ]. Various pathways including PI3K/AKT, MAPK, JAK/STAT, Wnt, NF-κB, and Hedgehog[ 428 , 431 ] as well as some oncogenes[ 432 ] promote the expression of the PD-1/PD-L1 axis. While contemporary chemotherapies targeting PD-L1 or PD-1 have proven to be an effective approach against certain cancers, the orientation of PD-L1 on tumor cell plasma membranes is essential for its binding to T cell PD-1 and thus immune regulation pathways[ 433 ]. Recently, a single palmitoylation modification site at Cys272 was identified in the cytoplasmic domain of PD-L1, which is a highly conserved region among various species ( Fig. 5 ) [ 434 ]. Palmitoylation is a co- or post-translational protein modification in which palmitate is covalently linked to cysteine residues via a reversible thioester linkage, also known as S-palmitoylation[ 435 ]. Lipid modification of proteins via palmitoylation has repeatedly been shown to enhance the affinity of membrane proteins to ordered plasma membrane domains or lipid rafts[ 87 , 436 - 438 ]. Recently, palmitoylation of PD-L1 was shown to affect its affinity for lipid rafts, membrane localization, and binding to the PD-1 receptor on T cells[ 433 ]. For example, molecular dynamics simulations indicate that palmitoylated PD-L1 resides in ordered plasma membrane domains facilitating a more thermodynamically favorable orientation, e.g., “stand-up” state compared to non-raft domains, which likely facilitates the engagement between cancer cell PD-L1 and T cell PD-1[ 433 ]. Furthermore, palmitoylation was shown to play a role in PD-L1 stability by reducing ubiquitination and consequent degradation[ 439 ]. With respect to PD-1/PD-L1 nanoclustering, since PD-1 expression is induced only after initiation of TCR signaling and PD-1 is involved in TCR clustering through its binding to PD-L1[ 440 ], it is logical to postulate that PD-1 clusters and stabilizes through its interactions with PD-L1 and TCR clusters ( Fig. 5 ). Consistent with this scenario, various protein components found in PD-1-associated clusters, such as Grb2, Lck, and ZAP-70 are also components of TCR-associated clusters[ 440 ]. Further studies are required to elucidate the complex interplay between TCR and PD-1 signalosomes, in order to determine their shared molecular partners and signaling mechanisms involving SHP-1 and/or SHP-2[ 441 ]. Hippo signaling pathway The Hippo pathway in mammals is constituted by a kinase cascade ( Fig. 4 ). A growth inhibitory signal results in the phosphorylation of MST1/2. In turn, phosphorylated MST1/2 activates LATS1/2 through phosphorylation. This last modification induces YAP phosphorylation which triggers YAP/TAZ cytoplasmic retention and degradation [ 442 , 443 ]. The pathway responds to multiple stimuli, e.g., G protein coupled receptor (GPCR) signals, cell-cell junction proteins, upstream adaptor proteins, activated hippo kinases, regulatory crosstalk with Wnt and mTOR signals, intrinsic and extrinsic mechanical forces and signals (integrins, extracellular matrix proteins), and metabolic status (glycolysis, hexosamine synthesis, mevalonate pathway) [ 442 , 444 ]. Growth signals induce dephosphorylated states in all members of the pathway. Interestingly, LATS1/2 are also inhibited by geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate, an intermediate product of the mevalonate pathway demonstrating the involvement of cholesterol synthesis and hippo pathway regulation. In addition, Rho adenylyl cyclase can also block LATS 1/2 enabling crosstalk to Hippo [ 445 ]. Recently, it has been demonstrated that cholesterol can influence the Hippo pathway by other mechanisms not involving LATS1/2 [ 446 ]. It is also noteworthy that the Hippo Pathway mediates tumor suppression and controls organ size by limiting the function of two proto-oncogenes, i.e., YAP and TAZ ( Fig. 4 ). Both transcriptional coactivators regulate the transcription factor TEAD which promotes cell proliferation, inhibition of cell differentiation and apoptosis [ 447 , 448 ]. The role of Hippo pathway in colorectal cancer is somewhat contradictory, however, 95% of colorectal tumors overexpress YAP [ 449 , 450 ]. An increasing number of studies suggest that the Hippo pathway could serve a central role in colorectal cancer pathogenesis. Specific deletion of YAP in intestinal epithelium has been shown to prevent dextran sodium sulphate (DSS) induced intestinal regeneration. In comparison, YAP-S127A mutation which induces inactivation of YAP, generates a loss of differentiation markers. YAP null intestinal organoids derived from Lgr5 positive stem cells revert to a regenerative program by suppression of Wnt signaling [ 451 - 454 ]. Hedgehog signaling pathway The Hedgehog (Hh) pathway is constituted by a family of proteins (Shh, Ihh, and Dhh) acting as ligands, transmembrane receptors (Ptch1 and Ptch2), transcription factors (GLI1–3), and signaling regulators (SMO, HHIP, SUFU, PKA, CK1, GSK3β, etc.). The most common ligand is Sonic hedgehog (Shh) which binds to its receptor Patched (PTCH), a transmembrane protein structurally similar to Niemann Pick protein 1 (NPC1). In an off state, without ligand, PTCH inhibits Smoothened (SMO) activation and its downstream signal. The Hedgehog signaling complex consisting of SUFU, PKA, CK1, GSK3β and GLI, is formed upon GLI cleavage and degradation, preventing its translocation to the nucleus and further transcriptional activation [ 455 ] [ 456 , 457 ]. Hh regulates the development of tissues during embryogenesis [ 458 ]. Pathway activity also regulates proliferation and stemness in several adult tissues and its disruption has been broadly associated with several diseases, including cancer. In the colon, Hh signals occur in stromal cells which modulate mucosal proliferation [ 459 ]. In relation to the ciliary membrane, unesterified cholesterol can directly affect Hh pathways signals [ 460 ]. For example, unesterified cholesterol binds to SMO, synergizing with Shh and inducing transcriptional activity over GLI [ 461 ]. It remains to be determined how the Hh pathway, e.g., PTCH, inhibits SMO in the absence of cholesterol. In this context, PTCH may reduce cholesterol bioavailability, reducing cholesterol binding to SMO. Due to its structural similarity to NPC1 and the compartmentalization of the pathway in ciliary membranes, cholesterol availability could be a master regulator of Hh signal [ 455 ] [ 462 ]. Membrane transporters Aside from membrane receptors, membrane transporters such as channels and carriers have been shown to localize to specific membrane domains which influences their function[ 463 , 464 ]. Interestingly, not only specific lipids but also particular combinations of lipids are often required for ion channels to exhibit their optimal structure and function[ 465 , 466 ]. Furthermore, disease states can lead to altered lipid homeostasis and perturbed membrane lipid composition, which in turn affect the function of transporter proteins[ 467 ]. Collectively, there is mounting evidence supporting the role of membrane domain organization and downstream signaling in the regulation of cellular processes. Disturbances in Membrane Biochemical and Biophysical Properties as a Cancer Driver Biological membrane homeostasis, e.g., correct spatiotemporal arrangement of signaling machineries, regulates plasma membrane signal transduction and intracellular membrane signaling ( Fig. 6a )[ 468 , 469 ]. As discussed above, various cellular components associated with several key membrane-associated signaling pathways have been reported to reside in lipid raft and raft-like domains, including those involved in EGFR/Ras, Wnt/β-catenin, insulin receptor, BAX/BAK, IP 3 receptor-ERLIN1/2, and T cell and B cell receptor signaling[ 202 , 334 , 470 - 475 ]. It has also been shown that multiple signaling effectors require accurate membrane configuration, i.e., nanoclustering, in order to signal efficiently ( Fig. 3a )[ 324 , 343 , 405 , 470 , 476 - 478 ]. Interestingly, many of these signaling effectors and all the mentioned signaling pathways have been shown to be directly involved in cancer cell signaling. This suggests that alterations in lipid raft, raft-like and other well-defined organelle membrane domains may directly and indirectly mediate cancer risk. In support of this notion, numerous studies have demonstrated that tumor cells exhibit higher levels of rafts/caveolae when compared to their healthy counterparts[ 20 ]. Moreover, lipid raft domain disturbances in cancer cells can increase cellular responsiveness to anti-cancer therapies[ 332 , 479 - 482 ]. Notably, a mechanism of action targeted by various anti-cancer drugs involves the modification of lipid raft-related protein composition[ 483 - 487 ]. Thus, a growing number of orthogonal studies now support the membrane-centric hypothesis that dysregulation of cell membrane biophysical properties actively mediates cancer risk ( Fig. 6b ). Figure 6. Dysregulation of membrane domains and the role of MADs as modulators of membrane homeostasis. Open in a new tab Plasma membrane domain biochemical and biophysical homeostasis, i.e., membrane order, proteolipid clustering and spatial compartmentalization of signaling components, regulates intracellular signaling. A) In a healthy cellular state, membrane domains display appropriate levels of membrane rigidity and clustering and signaling-associated effectors temporally relocalize to optimize canonical cell signaling. B) In the context of cancer, alterations in membrane domain features are modified, e.g., increased membrane rigidity, clustering and effector recruitment. This loss of membrane domain homeostasis leads to an abnormal hyperactive cellular state. C) Remarkably, MADs possess the ability to target and reshape membrane domains. In various cases, MADs have been shown to alter membrane fluidity, proteolipid complexes and effector localization, consequently, suppressing oncogenic signaling. In this way, MADs can reinstate, to a significant extent, healthy cell signaling. High-fat diet increases cancer risk Global rates of overweight and obesity have steadily increased and affected over a billion children, adolescents, and adults, with the United States having the highest obesity rates of high-income countries [ 488 , 489 ]. Overweight and obesity are key clinical and public health burdens worldwide as risk of diabetes, cardiovascular disease, musculoskeletal disorders, and specific cancers increase concomitantly [ 489 ]. These chronic diseases are largely preventable since excessive fat accumulation is primarily driven by an imbalance between calories consumed and calories expended [ 489 ]. Along with a lack of physical activity, intake of excess energy-dense foods, such as foods containing large amounts of simple carbohydrates and fats, further perpetuate the obesity epidemic and its associated co-morbidities [ 489 , 490 ]. Mounting epidemiological evidence indicates that obesity promotes at least 13 types of cancer which make up 40% of all cancers diagnosed in the United States per year [ 491 ]. For example, individuals that are overweight or obese are 2-4 times more likely to develop specific types of endometrial cancers compared to normal-weight people and individuals with severe obesity are 7 times more likely to develop endometrial cancers [ 492 , 493 ]. In the United States, up to 20% of all cancer-related deaths can be attributed to obesity [ 494 ]. In preclinical studies, experimental diets rich in saturated fatty acids and cholesterol are commonly utilized in obesity research. In animal models, high-fat diet-induced obesity promotes cancer and tumor development [ 495 - 497 ]. Moreover, membrane phospholipid fatty acid composition can reflect dietary fatty acid consumption [ 498 , 499 ], and prolonged intake of dietary lipids alter cell plasma membrane structure even in the absence of excess weight gain [ 500 ]. For example, it has been observed that erythrocytes isolated from obese individuals have more rigid membranes compared to lean individuals [ 501 , 502 ]. Rigid plasma membranes have been shown to impair insulin signaling and glucose uptake [ 503 , 504 ]. This is noteworthy, since changes to the makeup of the plasma membrane can lead to alterations in the spatiotemporal organization and interactions of membrane proteins and the recalibration of downstream signaling [ 20 , 286 , 505 , 506 ]. These findings are noteworthy, because they may explain how diet and obesity promote cancer risk [ 507 ]. Thus, the normalization of the plasma membrane by targeted countermeasures merits further consideration [ 20 , 51 , 286 , 505 ]. Cellular cholesterol and its dysregulation in cancer Serum cholesterol levels, which is in part a reflection of saturated fat and dietary cholesterol consumption, has risen over the years, especially in high-income regions consisting of Australasia, North American, and western Europe [ 508 ]. Interestingly, hypercholesterolemia has been associated with increased cancer incidence and enhancement of tumorigenesis [ 509 , 510 ]. In patients with atherosclerotic cardiovascular diseases (CVD), where dyslipidemia and hypercholesterolemia lead to a build-up of fats and cholesterol in the artery walls, incidence of cancers and overall mortality were more than two-fold higher compared to patients with non-atherosclerotic CVD [ 511 ]. Moreover, wildtype mice fed a cholesterol-rich diet exhibited a 3-fold increase in colonic tumor formation following carcinogen administration compared to mice fed a cholesterol-free control diet [ 509 ]. This is noteworthy because dietary cholesterol supplementation can lead to an increase in plasma membrane rigidity after acute (2-week) and chronic (10-week) feeding [ 512 ]. From a membrane perspective, dietary cholesterol accounts for approximately one-third of the total body cholesterol [ 513 ] and up to 90% of total cell cholesterol is localized to the plasma membrane [ 514 - 516 ]. Unesterified cholesterol, also known as “free” cholesterol, is highly enriched at the plasma membrane, where it constitutes up to 90% of total cell cholesterol and 10–45 mol% of total plasma membrane lipids[ 514 - 516 ], where it influences lipid raft formation and both lipid raft-dependent and -independent cellular signaling processes [ 20 ]. Notably, loss of regulation of the cholesterol synthetic pathway has been shown in genomic, transcriptomic and case-control studies to occur in several cancers[ 517 - 519 ]. Data compiled by The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) indicate that the cholesterol biosynthesis pathway is upregulated in breast, lung, colon, and head and neck cancer[ 519 ]. This is mediated in part by a number of oncogenic signals, e.g., PI3K/AKT/mTOR, EGFR, RAS, and TP53, which activate sterol SREBP, a key rate-limiting transcription factor for de novo cholesterol biosynthesis[ 520 ]. From a cancer therapy perspective, EGFR translocation to cholesterol-rich lipid rafts promotes tumor resistance to EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors [ 174 ]. In addition, EGFR nanoclustering is elevated in lung cancer in comparison to normal lung cells [ 143 ], and both PIP 2 [ 143 ] and cholesterol [ 175 ] mediate the spatiotemporal formation of EGFR nanoclusters. Activating mutations in Wnt/β-catenin signaling have been shown to dysregulate cholesterol homeostasis in various cell types[ 521 , 522 ]. In support of this notion, multiple studies have established a link between serum cholesterol levels and cancer risk[ 523 - 527 ]. In this context, the use of various statins to inhibit HMG-CoA reductase, the rate limiting enzyme in the de novo cholesterol/mevanolate pathway, is associated with a reduced risk of developing cancer, e.g., melanoma, non-Hodgkin lymphoma, endometrial, breast, and colorectal cancers[ 528 - 531 ]. Consistent with these findings, cholesterol levels in cancer cells are typically higher than those in normal (wildtype) cells[ 532 - 534 ]. Furthermore, a number of studies have demonstrated that cancer tissues exhibit augmented uptake of serum cholesterol via LDL receptor, downregulation of the cholesterol exporter ABCA1, upregulation of HMG-CoA reductase and loss of feedback inhibition[ 534 - 539 ]. Altogether, these perturbations drive the increase and accumulation of cellular cholesterol. Collectively, these findings suggest that loss of cholesterol homeostasis is a critical contributing factor to cancer risk. Mounting evidence indicates that p53, a critical tumor suppressor gene, also serves as a master regulator of cholesterol homeostasis. As noted above, p53 function is disrupted in cancer by a variety of mechanisms including gene mutation, deletion, epigenetic silencing, or protein degradation [ 540 - 544 ]. It has been demonstrated that mutant p53 can form hetero oligomers with the wild type form, resulting in a dominant negative phenotype, i.e., loss of tumor suppressor function (LOF) [ 545 , 546 ]. Mutant p53 also has a longer half-life (2 to 12 h) compared with wild type p53 (20 min) [ 547 ]. It is now appreciated that mutant p53 proteins can acquire oncogenic properties through novel transcriptional activities and protein interactions, known as a “gain of function”(GOF) [ 548 , 549 ]. Interestingly, through GOF properties, mutant p53 has been found to bind to sterol SREBP2, increasing the expression of mevalonate pathway enzymes [ 550 ]. This can result in metabolic reprogramming [ 551 ], and perturb prenylation levels of small GTPases, e.g., Rho, Ras and Rab [ 550 ]. In contrast wild type p53 represses the mevalonate pathway to mediate tumor suppression [ 551 ]. Dysregulation of other lipids Impairment of the regulatory mechanisms associated with other membrane lipids has also been documented in various cancers. Changes in lipid-associated pathways in tumors, although overlooked in the past, are now routinely being characterized. Indeed, the reprogramming of membrane lipids is now considered a hallmark of cancer. Large-scale gene expression screening studies of advanced tumor tissue have identified the dysregulation of different metabolic pathways associated with fatty acids, triglycerides, lipid second messengers (PIP 2 ), lipid mediators (eicosanoids), and structural lipids (glycosphingolipids)[ 535 ]. Similarly, an increase in the mol% levels of several lipids such as phosphatidic acid (PA), glycerophosphoethanolamine (PE), glycerophosphocholine (PC), glycerophosphoinositol (PI) and triglycerides (TG) as well as an elevation in the degree of membrane fatty acid saturation has also been documented in several tumor types[ 552 - 556 ]. Moreover, the elevated expression of lipid-modifying enzymes such as, phospholipase C (PLC), phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) and phospholipase D (PLD), lipogenic enzymes, including fatty acid synthase (FASN) and acetyl-CoA carboxylase (ACC), and ATP citrate lyase (ACLY), which in conjunction with these other enzymes promote cholesterol biosynthesis, is often a predictor of a poor prognosis in cancer patients and notably is also a phenotypic feature detected in various types of cancer[ 552 - 556 ]. Finally, cutting-edge chemical analysis tools, such as Raman scattering microscopy, matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization (MALDI), electrospray ionization (ESI) and tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS), which display a relatively greater sensitivity have been applied to examine the alterations in cellular membrane lipid identity, fatty acid composition and lipid spatial distribution in a cancer background[ 557 - 562 ]. Collectively, it is evident that tumor cells exhibit a high requirement for multiple lipid species and augmented lipogenesis is a hallmark of cancer. Dysregulation of membrane fluidity and nanocluster domains and their role in cancer signaling All the diverse membrane components discussed above including proteins, lipids, carbohydrates and the cytoskeleton affect the plasma membrane microenvironment in a direct and dynamic manner. In addition, plasma membrane biophysical properties, e.g., fluidity/rigidity, mediates the structure, organization, dynamics, and consequently, the function of multiple membrane effectors ( Fig. 6a )[ 258 , 345 , 563 - 566 ]. The organization of the plasma membrane, in part, is regulated by the favored interactions between specific types of lipids. Due to their fundamental features, these lipids can arrange in a specific manner in order to form specialized distinct membrane domains. As conveyed herein, cholesterol, sphingolipids, and saturated phospholipids are essential elements of Lo domains. In comparison, polyunsaturated and branched chain lipids preferentially localize into Ld domains[ 567 , 568 ]. These membrane domains are mutually excluded and coexist in the plasma membrane. Consequently, the plasma membrane displays diverse characteristics and functionalities. Together, these membrane features cooperatively give rise to a biophysical membrane phenotype, i.e., membrane order/rigidity. It is noteworthy, that plasma membrane functionality is modulated by proteolipid composition, organization, and the dynamic interplay between membrane elements[ 57 , 59 ]. Therefore, the relative rigidity of the plasma membrane is believed to play a central role in its homeostatic state. As described previously, different proteins and lipids have been shown to reside in, and others to be excluded from, membrane regions exhibiting relatively high membrane order. Confocal, FLIM-FRET, FCS, STED, STORM and other single-molecule measurements have described in detail the sequestration of distinct receptors and effectors in well-defined plasma membrane domains[ 569 - 574 ]. Membrane order has also been implicated in the modulation of signaling events confined to distinct membrane domains. For example, the T cell immunological synapse, a site of early activation of the T cell receptor (TCR), has been shown to localize to Lo domains and its relatively high rigidity is essential for TCR signaling[ 423 ]. In regard to the Wnt signaling pathway, as stated above, canonical Wnt/β-catenin signaling requires the arrangement and localization of its plasma membrane co-receptors, i.e., LRP5/6 and Fzd, in cholesterol-rich ordered domains, which in turn triggers receptor phosphorylation, activation and recruitment of downstream effectors, e.g., Dvl and Axin, to the cytofacial leaflet in order to transduce the Wnt-mediated message intracellularly[ 575 - 577 ]. In cancer, the loss of cellular plasma membrane homeostasis can trigger alterations in the structure, organization and dynamics of membrane domains ( Fig. 6b ). These variations can be initiated by cellular cues, such as metabolic reprogramming, changes in membrane proteolipid composition and localization, genetic mutations, abnormal epigenetic modifications and carcinogenic substances[ 578 - 584 ]. If allowed to progress unrestrained, the ensuing loss of homeostasis can drive reprogramming of fundamental cellular properties such as plasma membrane order and nanoclustering ( Fig. 6b ). Most importantly, the newly established anomalous cellular state, which promotes aberrant signaling, can increase cancer risk. Although a universal trend has not been recognized regarding the directionality of membrane order impairment, it is unequivocal that a shift from healthy plasma membrane order homeostasis can profoundly affect protein expression, endocytosis, apoptosis, cell proliferation and metastasis as well as drug resistance[ 256 , 585 ]. Not surprisingly, the degree of membrane rigidity exhibited by cancer cells differs from that of normal cells. For example, breast and hairy cancer cells as well as hepatoma tumors display higher membrane rigidity compared to healthy cells[ 586 - 588 ]. The adaptative reconfiguration of membranes in various cancer cell types can increase membrane rigidity, thereby promoting multidrug resistance in these cells [ 589 - 592 ]. This increase in membrane rigidity is frequently, if not always, accompanied by an increase in the levels of membrane cholesterol and sphingomyelin. Interestingly, alterations in plasma membrane rigidity in cancer cells do not always lead to the same outcomes. Fluidization of membranes in cancer cells appears to be correlated with their malignant potential and competency to metastasize[ 589 , 593 ]. In addition, the ability of cancer cells to alter their membrane biochemical and biophysical properties can regulate anti-cancer drug cellular uptake, trafficking and responsiveness, thereby contributing to drug resistance[ 587 , 589 , 592 ]. Together, these findings further highlight the importance of plasma membrane rigidity as a cellular biophysical feature of cancer. Consistent with the dysregulation of plasma membrane order, alterations of protein, lipid, and carbohydrate nanoclustering at the plasma membrane have been linked to cancer risk[ 594 - 598 ]. For example, various oncoproteins increase their functionality via augmented plasma membrane nanoclustering[ 45 ]. Similarly, the overexpression of other membrane components, e.g., galectins, in the context of colorectal, pancreatic, breast and other cancers, can modulate the formation of membrane protein nanoclusters and their downstream signaling[ 599 - 602 ]. Plasma membrane nanoclustering of lipids and carbohydrates, similar to protein clustering, has been linked to cancer. For example, plasma membranes in cancers cells often display an altered spatial arrangement of surface saccharides when compared to healthy cells[ 594 ]. Furthermore, galectin membrane oligomers have been shown to induce the clustering of various carbohydrates at the plasma membrane[ 603 - 605 ]. Finally, alterations in the spatial organization of plasma membrane lipids have been associated with cancer risk. For example, the loss of PS asymmetric distribution between the exofacial and cytofacial membrane leaflets and increased PS exposure on the surface of malignant cells compared to healthy cells has been recently reported[ 606 - 608 ]. Notably, the efficacy of radiotherapy and chemotherapy-based anticancer treatments is dependent on the phenotype of PS exposure[ 609 ]. In agreement with this notion, the incidence of PS clusters at the plasma membrane of tumor tissues has been documented using magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), employing a PS-specific MRI-contrast agent[ 610 - 612 ]. As mentioned herein, additional negatively-charged phospholipids involved in central cellular signaling processes, e.g., PIP 2 and PA, have been documented to form nanoclusters in the plasma membrane and regulate various signaling events associated with cancer[ 613 - 617 ]. Due to their involvement in the initiation and amplification of cancer signaling, the modulation of plasma membrane biochemical and biophysical features by membrane-targeted countermeasures could potentially serve as a cancer chemoprevention therapeutic strategy. Cancer chemoprevention using MADs “Dietary bioactives” are components in foods or dietary supplements, aside from those needed to meet the most fundamental human nutritional needs, which account for changes in an individual's or population's overall level of health. As discussed above, although genetic factors contribute to cancer risk, environmental factors, e.g., diet, account for the majority of risk[ 618 , 619 ]. For example, by a simple adjustment of one’s dietary lifestyle, i.e., increase dietary fiber and reduce fat intake, the risk for colorectal cancer can be significantly reduced[ 620 , 621 ]. Another type of dietary bioactive involves the biological lipid class known as polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs). Among these, omega 3 (n-3) and omega 6 (n-6) PUFAs are essential dietary nutrients that readily incorporate into biological membranes of cells in many tissues and influence numerous physiological processes, including serving as precursors for series 2/3 prostanoids and series 4/5 leukotrienes, respectively[ 622 ]. Two well-studied bioactive n-3 PUFAs are eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) ( Fig. 7 ). These n-3 PUFAs are enriched in fish oil, however, in humans their production from dietary precursors, e.g., alpha-linolenic acid (ALA), is highly inefficient[ 623 ]. Moreover, enzymatic competition with the synthesis of long-chain n-6 PUFA, e.g., arachidonic acid (AA), which is produced from linoleic acid (LA) and is found in much greater abundance in a typical Western diet, further affects EPA and DHA availability in humans[ 624 ]. Interestingly, n-6 PUFAs have more often been linked with pro-inflammatory responses, whereas n-3 PUFAs tend to manifest opposing effects[ 625 , 626 ]. A mounting body of experimental, epidemiological and clinical data suggest that an increase in the intake of n-6 PUFA over n-3 PUFA, e.g., high n-6 PUFA / n-3 PUFA ratio, promotes chronic inflammatory diseases such as non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD), cardiovascular disease, obesity, inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), rheumatoid arthritis and Alzheimer’s disease (AD)[ 626 ]. Since there is a strong correlation between inflammation and cancer development, higher intakes of n-3 PUFA could provide a biological chemoprotective effect[ 627 ]. Recent evidence suggests that the incorporation of n-3 PUFAs into the diet may reduce cancer risk in humans[ 628 - 631 ]. Notably, it was recently revealed that n-3 PUFA supplementation, i.e., EPA, reduced rectal polyp size and number in patients with familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP), an inherited disorder characterized by cancer of the large intestine and rectum[ 632 , 633 ]. Even more impressive was the fact that fish oil derived EPA suppressed FAP to a degree similar to celecoxib, an FDA approved drug for the treatment of FAP. Thus, EPA and DHA appear to be well suited to act either alone or in combination with other drugs, e.g., NSAIDs[ 634 , 635 ]. Consistent with this notion, several studies have demonstrated that the combined intake of these MADs together with other agents, e.g., curcumin[ 636 ] and chemotherapy drugs[ 637 ], may improve their anti-cancer therapeutic efficacies. Figure 7. MAD metabolism and their incorporation into cellular membranes. Open in a new tab (1) Dietary bioactives or MADs are orally ingested as part of our regular diet. MADs, e.g., fish oil, curcumin and polyphenols, travel through the digestive system. (2) Upon reaching the small intestine, they are trafficked in different ways. (3) In the case of EPA and DHA (the main membrane-active components in fish oil), they are absorbed by the small intestine and are transported into the bloodstream. (4) In contrast, polyphenols, e.g., procyanidin dimers and trimers, and curcumin, are poorly absorbed by the small intestine and transit into the colon. (5) In the colon, select MADs encounter the microbiome, which can further metabolize these molecules. Finally, curcumin/polyphenols and EPA/DHA are incorporated into the membranes of colonocytes via the (6) colonic lumen or (7) blood, respectively. MADs can modulate membrane homeostasis and serve as chemopreventive cancer agents. Due to their putative health benefits, polyphenolic and terpenoid phytochemicals have become increasingly popular dietary supplements among consumers ( Fig. 7 ). Among these, diferuloylmethane, also known as curcumin, has received considerable interest from both the medical and scientific worlds as well as from the culinary world. Curcumin, a yellow color pigment found in the turmeric plant ( Curcuma longa ), has shown encouraging outcomes in patients with various pro-inflammatory diseases and cancer[ 638 - 644 ]. A series of clinical studies have examined the role of curcumin with respect to its therapeutic effects on various cancer-associated outcomes, including FAP ( NCT00927485 , NCT00641147 ), programmed cell death in colonic mucosa ( NCT00118989 ), aberrant crypt foci (ACF) ( NCT00365209 ) and the efficacy of drug combinatorial therapy ( NCT00745134 ). Notably, findings from one of the aforementioned phase IIa clinical trials indicated that curcumin at a dose of 4 g per day for 30 days significantly (40%) decreased the number of aberrant crypt foci (ACF) in a colorectal cancer (CRC) model[ 645 ] and in women and men[ 646 ]. More recently, the combinatorial effect of n-3 PUFA and curcumin utilizing a mouse CRC initiation model was investigated in our laboratory. Our findings demonstrate that these MADs when provided together can synergistically reduce (by 75%) the number of colonic ACF[ 55 ]. Most importantly, several studies have confirmed that, similar to n3-PUFAs, curcumin is well tolerated and that its bioactivity is potentially mediated by its transport to the target tissue, i.e., it acts via incorporation into the intestinal epithelium[ 55 , 646 , 647 ]. However, before an effective dietary combinatorial therapeutic approach can be embraced, it is crucial that we further dissect the cellular mechanisms linked to n-3 PUFAs, curcumin and other MADs. MADs exhibit pleiotropic dose-dependent effects on several physiological processes, including cell membrane organization and signaling, nuclear receptor activation, gene transcription and translation, fatty acid signaling and inflammation[ 648 - 654 ]. We postulate that n-3 PUFAs, curcumin and their derivatives fall into an exclusive class of MADs which, because of their unique amphiphilic features, possess the ability to modulate plasma membrane homeostasis, e.g., hierarchical structure and organization ( Fig. 6c ). Additionally, the ability of MADs to modulate the biochemical and biophysical properties of biological membranes may be broadened to include catechins and procyanidins[ 51 , 655 ]. With respect to the mechanism of action of MADs, there is a plethora of in vitro and in vivo evidence documenting the ability n-3 PUFAs to reshape the fatty acyl composition of cell plasma membrane phospholipids. For example, EPA and DHA are rapidly esterified into phospholipids at the sn -2 position in the lipid bilayer[ 656 , 657 ]. This is noteworthy, because the presence of these MADs in biological membranes conveys unique biophysical properties which have been linked to modifications in plasma membrane homeostasis[ 658 - 660 ]. For example, DHA is known to influence membrane rigidity/fluidity, ion permeability, fatty acid acylation/deacylation, and resident protein structure and function [ 319 - 321 ], including the suppression of EGFR signaling in tumor-bearing mice by disassociating EGFR from lipid rafts [ 322 ]. As mentioned previously, Ras function is sensitive to changes in plasma membrane properties since Ras proteins need to concentrate into nanoclusters for more efficient recruitment of proteolipid effectors in order to propagate downstream signaling [ 661 ]. Notably, Ras nanocluster formation is biologically important for both wildtype Ras and oncogenic/mutant Ras [ 661 ]. Interestingly, reduction of cellular plasma membrane cholesterol by statins reduces KRas interactions with critical downstream signaling domain lipids such as PS and PA [ 505 ]. Similar to cholesterol-depletion, incorporation of EPA and DHA into membrane phospholipids have been shown to attenuate oncogenic KRas nanocluster formation as well as KRas interactions with Raf1 in a dose-dependent manner, subsequently mitigating downstream ERK phosphorylation [ 505 , 662 ]. These findings support the feasibility of using membrane therapy to attenuate aberrant EGFR/KRas signaling events. With respect to the PD-1/PD-L1 signaling ( Fig. 5 ), PD-L1 has been shown to be constitutively expressed in cancer cells and promotes cancer cell immune evasion[ 430 - 432 , 663 , 664 ]. The small cytoplasmic domain of PD-L1 modulates its stability, degradation, and membrane localization[ 665 ]. Electrostatic interactions between basic amino acid resides in the cytoplasmic domain of PD-L1 and acidic phospholipids are critical for membrane association[ 665 ]. Interestingly, metformin, which affects lipid metabolism primarily via AMPK activation, disrupts PD-L1 levels at the plasma membrane thereby regulating immunosurveillance[ 665 ]. Interestingly, depletion of cholesterol in melanoma, lung, colorectal cancer cells and patient-derived tumor xenografts reduces PD-L1 expression, further reinforcing the targeting of cholesterol metabolism as a potential therapeutic target [ 666 - 668 ]. Consistent with this notion, both EGFR/KRas and PD-1/PD-L1 pathways, due to their membrane organization and signaling requirements, could be potential targets for intervention with MADs. As mentioned herein, dysregulation of Wnt signaling has been linked to various cancer processes in multiple tissues[ 316 , 669 - 674 ]. Despite major efforts, attempts to abate aberrant Wnt signaling using drugs have largely been unsuccessful due in part to substandard tumor cell targeting, deleterious side effects associated with longstanding treatments and a poor comprehension of the mechanistic details regarding agent bioactivity[ 675 ]. In relation to the role of MADs in cancer chemoprevention, we recently investigated the cooperative effect of n-3 PUFAs and curcumin in a mouse CRC model and demonstrated that these MADs synergistically reduce nuclear β-catenin levels in aberrant crypt foci[ 55 ]. Another promising class of MADs are polyphenolic phytochemicals, e.g., catechins and procyanidins, which are ubiquitous in plants such as fruits, vegetables, tea, coffee, chocolates, and legumes[ 676 , 677 ]. These polyphenols are usually consumed for their perceived health benefits such as antioxidant function[ 676 , 678 ]. However, it is now appreciated that these phytochemicals also interact with the lipids and proteins at the plasma membrane which can alter the function of specific receptors and transporters[ 678 , 679 ]. Although polymeric procyanidins have some systemic biological activity, they are not well absorbed and typically transit through the small intestine into the colon where they are further metabolized by gut microbes to generate monomeric catechin, epicatechin and other dimers-hexamer species[ 680 - 682 ]. These microbial metabolites can subsequently diffuse into the apical membranes of colonic epithelial cells. Recent evidence suggests that the phenolic compound (+)-catechin, and its dimeric form procyanidin B2 modulate cell plasma membrane biophysical properties[ 51 , 683 , 684 ], similar to what has been observed with other MADs such as n-3 PUFAs and curcumin[ 56 , 685 , 686 ]. These dietary constituents have been identified as modulators of plasma membrane composition and nano-organization, subsequently leading to alterations in membrane protein localization, structure, and function. Up to this point, we have reported on a variety of promising MADs with anti-cancer properties. Very recently, we discovered that an intrinsically produced adipokine, adiponectin, exhibits “membrane active” properties[ 285 ]. This 30 kDa protein, whose circulating blood levels are reduced in cases of obesity and type 2 diabetes[ 687 ], is inversely correlated with the onset of specific cancers [ 688 - 691 ]. This is consistent with studies indicating that overexpression or administration of adiponectin suppresses tumorigenesis[ 691 - 698 ]. Previously, both adiponectin and AdipoRon, a synthetic orally-active small-molecule adiponectin receptor agonist, suppress cancer risk in part by reducing the number of stem cells in organoid models[ 497 ]. Further investigation revealed that AdipoRon and adiponectin reduce Wnt signaling and stem cell proliferation by inhibiting cholesterol trafficking to the plasma membrane, therefore reducing plasma membrane order and Wnt co-receptor signaling[ 285 ]. Moreover, AdipoRon administration has been shown to ameliorate obesity-related diseases such as diabetes[ 699 ] and cardiovascular complications[ 700 ], as well as suppressing pancreatic tumor growth [ 701 ]. AdipoRon has been proposed as a possible cancer prevention strategy[ 702 ], and supporting evidence for the protective role of adiponectin against cancer has been reported both in mice and cell culture studies[ 691 - 698 ]. With regard to a mechanism of action, adiponectin and the adiponectin receptors, AdipoR1 and AdipoR2, are generally considered to have anti-diabetic properties since they modulate energy homeostasis by regulating glucose and fatty acid metabolism in part by AMPK and PPARα activation[ 703 , 704 ]. However, studies of adiponectin receptor homologs in yeast and C. elegans , in which there is no known adiponectin-like ligand, have revealed a different emerging role of the adiponectin receptors[ 705 ]. This paradigm shift depicts adiponectin receptors as evolutionarily conserved membrane fluidity sensors and regulators of membrane homeostasis since they act to remodel membrane phospholipid composition[ 705 , 706 ]. Furthermore, membrane rigidification activates adiponectin receptor signaling to promote fatty acid desaturation and incorporation of unsaturated fatty acid containing phospholipids into the cell membrane[ 707 - 709 ]. In this context, the adiponectin receptor functions as a lipid carrier protein similar to C1q/TNF-related proteins (CTRPs) to which adiponectin shares sequence homology[ 710 ]. Crystal structures of the adiponectin receptors indicate the presence of a cytoplasmic cavity capable of accommodating fatty acids or fatty acid-like substrates[ 711 ]. Furthermore, a zinc-coordination site suggests a hydrolytic reaction may occur within the cavity such as the proposed ceramidase activity first discovered in yeast adiponectin receptor homologs[ 712 , 713 ]. This updated view of adiponectin and the adiponectin receptors as membrane rigidity sensors and membrane phospholipid regulators, in combination with the activation of the adiponectin receptors via AdipoRon, could have beneficial therapeutic significance for human health, similar to other MADs. In conclusion, there is an urgent need to develop toxicologically innocuous MAD-based therapeutic approaches. Further investigation is needed to elucidate precisely how MADs and adiponectin act at the cellular and molecular level to suppress aberrant membrane signaling. Summary and Future Challenges There is an alarming cancer crisis in the United States and around the world. By the year 2040, the number of new cancer cases in the U.S. per year is expected to rise to 29.5 million with the number of cancer-related deaths exceeding 16.4 million[ 714 ]. Thus, if we are to avert this imminent cancer storm, we need to reinvest in cancer prevention now[ 714 ]. Unfortunately, for the targeted early detection and prevention of cancer, only ~0.5% of the total biomedical research budget to the National Institute of Health (NIH) ($43 billion)[ 714 ] for FY2021 was designated to the Division of Cancer Prevention (DCP) ($223,216,237)[ 715 ] of the National Cancer Institute (NCI). With respect to cancerous malignancies, environmental factors, e.g., diet and exercise, influence the risk for cancer. Consistent with this notion, 35% are linked directly to diet and an additional 14–20% to obesity[ 716 ]. Remarkably, it has been documented that cancer risk can be lowered by ~40% when humans adopt healthy dietary practices[ 716 ]. With respect to primary cancer prevention/interception, there is a growing body of evidence that MADs provide protection against various types of cancers. Most importantly, these diet-derived membrane bioactives are toxicologically innocuous, relatively inexpensive and overall free of harmful effects generally associated with therapeutic agents administered chronically. However, before MADs can be applied for the advancement of the chemoprevention field, additional mechanistic details linking diet, membrane therapy and cancer risk are required. Thus, the following critical issues need to be addressed. How does oncogene mediated loss of plasma membrane and endomembrane lipid homeostasis modulate cellular signaling? How do we recalibrate a perturbed membrane steady state to reduce cancer risk? Recent thought-provoking findings have provided us with new mechanistic insight in this regard. We propose that MADs, because of their unique membrane bioactivity and pleiotropic effects, are capable of tuning cellular membrane hierarchical organization, thus mitigating various signaling networks that are essential for cancer initiation and progression ( Figs. 6c and 7 ). MADs could even prove useful to combat viral diseases, which have been shown to target raft domains and some of their components, e.g., cholesterol, to infect human cells, including human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)[ 717 , 718 ] and severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2)[ 719 ], the latter being the causative agent of our most recent world pandemic[ 720 ]. Finally, we strongly believe that elucidation of the role of MADs in regard to cancer prevention/interception will have a profound translational impact because these dietary bioactives exhibit additional health benefits, e.g., a reduction in mortality. Acknowledgments This work was supported by the Allen Endowed Chair in Nutrition &amp; Chronic Disease Prevention, Texas A&amp;M AgriLife Institute for Advancing Health Through Agriculture, and the National Institutes of Health (R35-CA197707, RO1-CA244359, and P30-ES029067). A. Erazo-Oliveras is a recipient of a Diversity Supplement Award (R35 CA197707-S1) and a National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine Ford Foundation Postdoctoral Fellowship. M.L. Salinas is a recipient of the National Science Foundation Texas A&amp;M University System Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation Bridge to the Doctorate Fellowship (HRD-1612776). Abbreviations: ACC acetyl-CoA carboxylase ACF aberrant crypt foci ATP adenosine triphosphate ABC ATP-binding cassette ALA alpha-linolenic acid AD Alzheimer’s disease ABCA1 ABC transporter A1 ACLY ATP citrate lyase ABCG1 ABC transporter G1 ApoB/E apolipoprotein B/E AA arachidonic acid AFM atomic force microscopy CVD cardiovascular diseases Ck1γ casein kinase 1 gamma CERT ceramide transfer protein Chol cholesterol ACAT cholesterol acyltransferase CL C-Laurdan CRC colorectal cancer DRMs detergent-resistant membrane DSMs detergent-soluble membrane DSS dextran sodium sulphate Di-4 Di-4-ANEPPDHQ Dkk1 Dickkopf 1 dSTORM direct stochastic optical reconstruction microscopy DCP Division of Cancer Prevention Dvl Dishevelled DHA docosahexaenoic acid EPA eicosapentaenoic acid EGF epidermal growth factor EGFR epidermal growth factor receptor EM electron microscopy ESI-MS electrospray ionization mass spectrometry ER endoplasmic reticulum ERK extracellular signal-regulated kinase FAP familial adenomatous polyposis FASN fatty acid synthase FCS fluorescence correlation spectroscopy FLIM-FRET fluorescence lifetime imaging microscopy combined with fluorescence resonance energy transfer FIB-SEM focused ion-beam-scanning EM FRAP fluorescence recovery after photobleaching Fzd Frizzled GOF gain of function GP generalized polarization GPMVs giant plasma membrane vesicles GPI glycosylphosphatidylinositol GRAMD1 GRAM domain-containing 1 GPCR G protein coupled receptor GDP guanosine diphosphate GTP guanosine triphosphate Hh Hedgehog HepS heparin sulfate HIV human immunodeficiency virus IFC imaging flow cytometry immune-EM immunoelectron microscopy IBD inflammatory bowel disease INM inner nuclear membrane JNK Jun N-terminal kinase LBR Lamin B receptor LA linoleic acid Ld liquid disordered Lo liquid ordered LDL low-density lipoprotein LRP5/6 low density lipoprotein receptor-related proteins 5/6 Lypd6 Ly6 family protein LY6/PLAUR domain-containing 6 LEF lymphoid enhancer-binding factor MHC major histocompatibility complex MALDI matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization MADs membrane active dietaries MAPK mitogen-activated protein kinase MCSs membrane contact sites MAMs mitochondria-associated endoplasmic reticulum membranes GM1 monosialotetrahexosylganglioside NanoSIMS nanoscale ion mass spectrometry NCI National Cancer Institute NIH National Institutes of Health NPC1/2 Niemann-Pick C1/2 NAFLD non-alcoholic fatty liver disease NE nuclear envelope NMR nuclear magnetic resonance NL new lung nLD nuclear lipid droplets n-3 omega 3 n-6 omega 6 ONM outer nuclear membrane OSPB oxysterol-binding protein PTCH patched PBR peripheral benzodiazepine receptor PPARs peroxisome proliferator activated receptors PALM photo-activated localization microscopy PA phosphatidic acid PG phosphatidylglycerol PIP 2 Phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate PIP 3 Phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-trisphosphate PI3P Phosphatidylinositol 3-phosphate PI4P phosphatidylinositol 4-phosphate PS phosphatidylserine PLC/D phospholipase C/D PI3K phosphoinositide 3-kinase PALM photo-activated localization microscopy PTEN phosphate and tensin homolog deleted on chromosome 10 PM plasma membrane PUFAs polyunsaturated fatty acids PD-1 programmed cell death protein 1 PD-L1 programmed cell death ligand RCT reverse cholesterol transport SARS-CoV-2 severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 SPT single-particle tracking SMO smoothened Shh sonic hedgehog SCD stearoyl-CoA desaturase 1 STAR steroidogenic acute regulatory protein SOAT sterol o-acyltransferase SREBP sterol regulatory element binding protein STED stimulated emission depletion STORM stochastic optical reconstruction microscopy SIM structured illumination microscopy MS/MS tandem mass spectrometry TCF T cell factor TCR T cell receptor TOF-SIMS time of flight secondary ion mass spectrometry TCGA The Cancer Genome Atlas TIRFM total internal reflection fluorescence microscopy TG triglycerides VLDL very low-density lipoprotein Footnotes Conflict of interest statement The authors declare no conflicts of interest.